----- VN022 page 1 -----
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS 
IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH AND WELL-BEING OF 
ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 

----- VN022 page 2 -----

----- VN022 page 3 -----
Acknowledgements
 
The Study on ‘Comprehensive Study on School-Related Factors Impacting Mental 
Health and Well-Being of Adolescent Boys and Girls in Viet Nam’ was carried out as part 
of a broader collaboration between UNICEF Viet Nam and the Ministry of Education and Training 
(MOET), with research and technical expertise provided by International Consultant, Amie Alley 
Pollack, National Consultant, Dang Hoang Minh (Vietnam National University) and Research 
Assistants, Phuong Nguyen, Trang Le, and Lam Le. The Study aims to build understanding of how 
School-Related factors impact the mental health and well-being of adolescent boys and girls in 
Viet Nam and the role of the education system in addressing both School-Related risks and the 
delivery of mental health and psychosocial support.
The Study benefited from financial and methodological support from UNICEF Viet Nam. The 
research team would like to acknowledge the great contribution from the Education Department 
team of UNICEF Viet Nam for their tireless collaboration, support, organization of study activities, 
and review of all report drafts.  The research team would also like to acknowledge support from 
external reviewers, Lesley Miller, Ngo Thi Quynh Hoa, Marcy Levy, Roshni Basu, Joanna Lai, Le 
Anh Lan, Rachel Harvey, and Vincenzo Vinci, for their thoughtful and detailed comments on 
early drafts. The research team highly appreciates the Political Education and Student Affairs 
and Physical Education Departments of MOET for supporting the research including critical 
consultation on draft reports. And finally, the research team would like to thank the many 
students, parents, teachers, administrators, and expert participants for contributing their time 
and answering many questions. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
1
----- VN022 page 4 -----
ADHD Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
CAMH Child and Adolescent Mental Health
CBT Cognitive behaviour therapy
DOET  Department of Education and Training
DOH Department of Health
DOLISA Department of Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs
FGD Focus Group Discussion
HCMC Ho Chi Minh City
KII Key Informant Interview
LGBTQ Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (or questioning)
MHPSS Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
MOET Ministry of Education and Training
MOH Ministry of Health
MOLISA Ministry of Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs
PED Physical Education Department, Ministry of Education and 
Training
PESAD Political Education and Student Affairs Department, Ministry 
of Education and Training
PTSD Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
Abbreviations
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
2

----- VN022 page 5 -----
Acknowledgements ...............................................................................................................................................................................1
Abbreviations ..............................................................................................................................................................................................2
Chapter 1: Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................................4
Chapter 2: Adolescent Mental Health: Global Literature Review ...............................................................................9
Chapter 3: Adolescent Mental Health in Viet Nam Literature Review .....................................................................21
Chapter 4: Methodology......................................................................................................................................................................26
Chapter 5: Adolescent Student Mental Health and Well-Being in Viet Nam Study Findings ....................33
Chapter 6: School-Related Factors Impacting Student Mental Health and  
Well-being in Viet Nam .........................................................................................................................................................................41
Chapter 7: School-Based Adolescent Student MHPSS Policies and Programmes in Viet Nam ................53
Chapter 8: Adolescent Student MHPSS Policies and Programmes in Viet Nam:  
Social and Health Sectors, and Cross-Sector Collaboration ...........................................................................................64
Chapter 9: Conclusions and Recommendations ..................................................................................................................73
Appendix 1 ...................................................................................................................................................................................................82
Appendix 2 ...................................................................................................................................................................................................86
Appendix 3 ...................................................................................................................................................................................................90
References .....................................................................................................................................................................................................108
Table of Content
** Please refer to the Executive Summary for a brief summary of the report findings and 
recommendations.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
3
----- VN022 page 6 -----
Chapter 1  
Introduction
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
4

----- VN022 page 7 -----
Study Problem and Rational
Worldwide about 15% of children and 
adolescents experience mental disorders and 
neuropsychiatric conditions are the leading 
cause of disability in young people (Polanczyk, 
Salum, Sugaya, Caye & Rohde, 2015). With 50% 
of mental health disorders beginning by the 
age of 14 and 75% by the age of 24 (Kessler et al., 
2005), child and adolescent mental health has 
become a global priority. There is a significant 
worldwide gender gap in adolescent mental 
health, with girls having worse average mental 
health than boys (Campbell, Bann & Patalay, 
2021). In Viet Nam, evidence suggests that 
8% - 29% of adolescents suffer from mental 
health problems with boys having higher 
rates of behavioral disorders and girls having 
higher rates of emotional problems such as 
anxiety and depression (UNICEF, 2018; Weiss 
et al., 2014). Mental health problems are a 
significant burden to adolescents in Viet Nam. 
Among boys, behavioural disorders are the 
second leading cause of disability among 
10–14-year-olds and the 5 th leading cause 
among boys aged 15-19. Girls face multiple 
sources of mental health related disability with 
behavioural disorders and anxiety disorders 
both leading causes of disability among 
10–14-year-olds, and depressive disorders 
the 3rd leading cause of disability among boys 
aged 15-19 (UNICEF Country Dashboard, 
2019). Poor understanding of mental health 
problems, social stigma, and limited mental 
health services and resources contribute to 
most of these children receiving no treatment 
or support. When emerging mental health 
problems are left untreated, these problems 
severely impact children’s development, 
educational achievement and potential in life.
Adolescence (10-19 years of age) is a critical 
period for the development of socioemotional 
skills essential for healthy functioning and 
well-being. Supportive families, schools and 
communities enable adolescents to effectively 
navigate life challenges and develop healthy 
psychosocial skills. School-related factors can 
both increase risk for mental health problems 
and protect adolescents’ health and well-
being. Extensive evidence indicates that 
school climate, including safety, engagement 
and environment factors, impacts adolescent 
mental health (McChesney & Aldridge, 2018). 
Academic pressure, from parents, teachers 
and peers and related to intensive curriculum 
and exam requirements, is another school-
related factor associated with adolescent 
mental health problems (Nguyen, Dedding, 
Pham, Wright & Bunders, 2013). Bullying and 
other social stressors have been shown to 
negatively impact mental health in adolescent 
students in Viet Nam (Le et al., 2019).
School-based mental health services are 
crucial to supporting adolescent student 
mental health and addressing school-related 
mental health risk factors. Schools are one of 
adolescents’ most important psychosocial 
environments, allowing for direct access to 
central figures in life (teachers, peers). School-
based mental health and psychosocial support 
(MHPSS) allows for relatively easy access to 
students in need of care, as services are not 
dependent on the parent or guardian bringing 
the child to a clinic. And when implemented 
correctly they can de-stigmatize mental health 
services by integrating them with education. 
Research on the use of universal (i.e., targeting 
all students) and selective (i.e., targeting 
students at risk) school-based interventions for 
mental health indicates that schools provide 
excellent settings for targeting children’s 
mental health, their academic performance, 
and the important connection between them 
(Greenwood, Kratochwill & Clements, 2008). In 
Viet Nam, research supports the use of school-
based programmes to support child mental 
health (Dang, Weiss, Nguyen, Tran & Pollack, 
2017).
Significance of the Study
This study analyses primary data regarding 
adolescent student mental health, including 
mental health needs and school-based risk 
factors. The study also includes a review of 
current adolescent student mental health-
related policies and programmes. Analysis 
of this data offers insights into student 
mental health needs and potential areas 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
5
----- VN022 page 8 -----
for programmatic and policy support. 
Specifically, the study findings and 
recommendations will be primarily useful 
to UNICEF Viet Nam and the Ministry of 
Education and Training (MOET) of Viet Nam, 
and secondarily useful to the Ministry of 
Health (MOH) and the Ministry of Labour, 
Invalids and Social Affairs (MOLISA). 
UNICEF has made child and adolescent 
mental health and well-being a key strategic 
priority for 2022-2026. This focus reflects 
the critical role of mental health in child 
development, educational engagement 
and success, healthy relationships, and full 
engagement in life and society. With the 
global pandemic continuing to present 
overwhelming challenges for children and 
youth, prioritization of child mental health 
needs is needed now more than ever. This 
study will inform UNICEF Viet Nam’s strategic 
planning and programme development as 
they work to support the government of Viet 
Nam in this area. 
MOET has shown great commitment 
to addressing adolescent student 
mental health needs. Study findings and 
recommendations will aid MOET as they 
consider policy supporting student well-
being, and as they work to develop effective 
programmes and services for students 
in schools. And finally, study findings will 
inform all ministries engaged in supporting 
adolescent mental health – MOET, MOH, and 
MOLISA – as they work to examine areas for 
potential cooperation and coordinate policy 
and service provision. Each sector plays a 
critical role in adolescent student health, 
development and future success. Thus, we 
hope that the study will inform each Ministry, 
and support Ministry-level collaboration. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
6

----- VN022 page 9 -----
Key Audiences
Educational policy makers from the Viet 
Nam MOET are a key audience for this 
study and report. This research may inform 
educational policy makers as they consider 
how to best support adolescent student 
well-being. Likewise, the report offers data 
and recommendations likely to benefit 
policy makers from MOH and MOLISA. Data 
collected include areas of health and social 
sector support for adolescent mental health, 
and recommendations include specific 
suggestions for each sector. Furthermore, 
connections between Ministries and cross-
sectors are explored in the research with 
specific recommendations made regarding 
areas for improved cross-sector support. This 
research is also intended to inform UNICEF 
Viet Nam in their efforts to advocate for policy 
and programmatic progress in the area of 
adolescent mental health. 
Provincial and district-level education, 
health and social sector administrators, 
principals, teachers, parents, students will also 
benefit from this report’s key findings and 
recommendations. International researchers, 
policy makers and programme developers 
working within the area of adolescent student 
mental health may find this research and 
report useful as well. 
Goals and Objectives
This research aims to build understanding 
of how School-Related factors impact the 
mental health and well-being of adolescent 
boys and girls in Viet Nam and the role of 
the education system in addressing both 
School-Related MHPSS risks and the delivery 
of services. This study includes assessment of 
the relationship between adolescent mental 
health challenges (anxiety, depression, 
stress) and school-related risk factors (school 
climate, academic pressure and social stress). 
Contextual factors such as age, gender, 
socioeconomic status (students from 
both public and private high schools are 
examined to broaden the economic range) 
and geographical region (four provinces of 
Ha Noi, Dien Bien, Gia Lai and Dong Thap 
are included to represent various regions of 
Viet Nam and both urban and rural areas).  
Systemic factors related to the relationship 
between school factors and student mental 
health are investigated via qualitative data 
collected from each level of the educational 
system (school, district, province, ministry) 
and across government sectors impacting 
student mental health (MOET, MOLISA, 
MOH). 
Study Questions
The study addresses two primary questions:
1. What is the relation between school-
related factors and mental health/well-
being issues of adolescent girls and boys; 
and 
2. What programme interventions targeting 
schools can improve adolescent mental 
health and well-being for boys and girls in 
Viet Nam. 
Study Limitations
Study findings are limited in several important 
ways. The study was conceived and developed 
in December 2020 - January 2021. During 
this time, Viet Nam had managed to contain 
COVID-19. Aside from a significant impact 
on tourism and other industries reliant on 
international travel, life in Viet Nam was 
relatively normal. As the focus of the study is 
primarily on adolescent mental health and 
schools, research tools and methods were 
developed in collaboration with MOET to 
address the key questions and did not include 
analysis of the pandemic’s impact on student 
mental health. Then in May 2021 a significant 
COVID-19 outbreak emerged in the South of 
Viet Nam prompting nation-wide lockdowns 
and school closures. While study data had 
already been collected in the three more rural 
provinces of Dien Bien, Gia Lai and Dong Thap, 
data collection in Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC) 
and Ha Noi was unable to proceed as planned 
at that time. Data collection was allowed to 
proceed in Ha Noi in September 2021, using 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
7
----- VN022 page 10 -----
electronic surveys for children and teachers, 
and online interviews and focus groups. Data 
collection in HCMC was never possible due to 
the extent of the outbreak in that municipality. 
Potential study limitations related to these 
events include:
1. The possible impact of COVID-19 related 
stress on adolescents in Ha Noi, which 
may be different from the impact of 
COVID-19 on participants from Dien Bien, 
Gia Lai and Dong Thap as data collection 
in those provinces occurred pre-outbreak. 
Without pre-post outbreak data we are 
unable to ascertain if participant’s reports 
of mental health symptoms or needs 
were impacted by the outbreak in Ha 
Noi. We must assume that to be the case 
considering research on the impact of 
COVID-19 related stress on adolescents 
around the world. 
2. Possible reduced generalizability of 
study findings to students and schools 
nationwide due to a loss of HCMC data. 
HCMC represents a unique geographical 
area of the country in terms of location 
and urbanization. Study generalizability to 
urban schools and students is bolstered 
by inclusion of participants from Ha Noi, 
but would have been strengthened by 
including HCMC in the study. 
3. The original plan was to have two KIIs each 
from three ministries, and two KIIs from 3 
departments across 5 provinces. This was 
achieved in the three rural provinces but 
the May 2021 outbreak led to challenges 
securing KI interviews within HCMC and 
Ha Noi. At least 1 KII was obtained from 
each Department in Ha Noi and from each 
Ministry. Fewer interviews with sector 
leaders and experts may have impacted 
our understanding of key policy and 
programmatic challenges. 
Study findings may be limited by research 
assumptions as well. The study design is built 
upon the assumption that certain school-
related factors are most likely to impact student 
mental health and well-being. Previous studies 
demonstrating the relationship between 
student mental health and school factors 
such as school climate, academic pressure 
and social stress have informed our focus on 
these factors. The study aims to focus broadly 
on issues that may be related to adolescent 
mental health, studying for example family 
factors such as parental understanding of 
adolescent mental health, parental academic 
pressure and parental connection to the 
school, and community factors such as access 
to medical or social services for adolescent 
mental health support. However, the study 
does not examine the impact of other 
potential risk-factors including (1) school 
infrastructure factors such as curriculum, class 
size, and teacher training; (2) family factors 
such as parental mental health and well-being 
and parent-child relationship quality; and (3) 
social factors such as poor community mental 
health literacy, community perceptions of 
gender roles, and community mental health 
stigma and discrimination towards mental 
illness, or based on gender identity or sexual 
orientation. It must be assumed that these 
and other factors are also important to student 
mental health and must be considered in a 
wholistic approach to adolescent health and 
well-being.
While not a limitation per se, recent structural 
changes within MOET should be monitored to 
ensure continued progress towards student 
MHPSS goals. Prior to June 2021 the Political 
Education and Student Affairs Department 
(PESAD) within the MOET held primary 
responsibility for student mental health and 
PESAD was an active collaborator in the current 
research. In June 2021 this responsibility was 
shifted to the Physical Education Department 
(PED) within MOET. The transition of student 
mental health responsibilities to the PED has 
been smooth indicating that the PED will be 
equally committed to issues of student mental 
health. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
8

----- VN022 page 11 -----
Chapter 2  
Adolescent Mental Health: 
Global Literature Review
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
9
----- VN022 page 12 -----
Adolescence is the period of transition 
between childhood and adulthood. It is a time 
of great physical, intellectual, emotional and 
social change in a person’s life. This transition 
holds exciting opportunities for growth, as 
well as vulnerabilities for young people as 
they strive to become healthy, happy, and 
productive adults. Ensuring that adolescents 
have all the support they need during this 
critical time is essential.  
2.1 Adolescent Mental Health
Mental health underlies healthy and successful 
adolescent development. Mental health 
includes our emotional, psychological, and 
social well-being. It affects how we think, feel, 
and act. It also helps determine how we handle 
stress, relate to others, and make choices. 
Positive mental health allows adolescents 
to realize their full potential, cope with the 
stresses of life, learn and work productively, 
form and maintain healthy relationships, 
and make meaningful contributions to their 
families and communities. 
However, many adolescents experience 
mental health problems which pose a serious 
threat to their healthy development. Globally, 
mental health problems pose a major 
burden of disease for adolescents. In 2019, 
about 15%, or about 1 in 7, of adolescents 
around the world experienced mental health 
problems (Polanczyk, 2015). This means that 
an estimated 175 million adolescent boys 
and girls suffer from debilitating emotional 
and behavioural problems, putting them 
at risk for poor social, academic and health 
outcomes at a crucial time of their young lives. 
Recognizing the enormity of this problem for 
the health and functioning of individuals and 
societies, the UN Sustainable Development 
Goals have included mental health as a key 
target, aiming to reduce premature mortality 
from noncommunicable diseases by 1/3 by 
2030 through prevention and treatment, and 
through promotion of mental health and well-
being (Target 3.4).  
2.2 Common Mental Health 
Problems in Adolescence
Common mental health problems in 
adolescence include depression, anxiety 
and behavioural disorders. Depression in 
adolescence is characterized by persistent 
feelings of sadness, loss of interest and energy, 
irritability, feeling negative and worthless. 
Globally, depression is the fourth leading cause 
of illness and disability among adolescents 
aged 15-19 years and fifteenth for those aged 
10-14 years. Girls and young women are up 
to three times more likely than boys to have 
depressive disorders and to attempt self-harm 
(WHO, 2014). All teenagers can be moody or 
irritable at times, but depression causes severe 
emotional, behavioural and cognitive changes 
in young people that make it very difficult 
for them to engage in school, maintain 
relationships with friends and family, and 
envision a bright future. If depression persists 
untreated, adolescents are at-risk for school 
drop-out, adult unemployment, substance 
abuse, early pregnancy/parenthood and 
depression in adulthood (Clayborn, Varin, 
Colman, 2019). Poor psychosocial outcomes 
are often linked and can lead to the 
propagation of lifelong difficulties. 
In severe cases, depression can lead to suicide. 
Globally, suicide is the fourth leading cause of 
death in 15-19-year-olds (WHO, June 2021). 
An estimated 62,000 adolescents died in 2016 
as a result of self-harm. 77% of global suicides 
occur in low- and middle-income countries. 
While girls report higher rates of suicidal 
thinking, more males die due to suicide (12.6 
per 100 000 males compared with 5.4 per 100 
000 females).
Common methods of suicide include ingestion 
of pesticide, hanging and firearms. Risk factors 
for suicide are multifaceted, including harmful 
use of alcohol, abuse in childhood, stigma 
against help-seeking, barriers to accessing 
care and access to means. Communication 
through digital media about suicidal behaviour 
is an emerging concern for this age group. In 
Asia, suicide is among the top causes of death 
among teenagers, and Asian youths have 
high prevalence rates of ever suicidal ideation 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
10

----- VN022 page 13 -----
(11.7%) and attempted suicide (2.4%) in six 
ASEAN member states [Blum, Sudhinaraset, & 
Emerson, 2012; Peltzer, Yi, & Pengpid, 2017).  
Anxiety is another common mental 
health problem in adolescence. Anxiety 
is characterized by  intense, excessive and 
persistent worry and fear. All adolescents have 
stress and worry at times, but young people 
with an anxiety disorder experience serious 
emotional, physical and cognitive distress and 
have difficulty concentrating on things other 
than their worries or fears. Anxiety disorders 
are the ninth leading cause of illness and 
disability for adolescents aged 15-19 years 
and sixth for those aged 10-14 years. Anxiety 
disorders are higher among girls than boys and 
are more common among older adolescents. 
Adolescents with anxiety disorders are at an 
increased risk of adult anxiety, depression, drug 
abuse, and educational underachievement as 
young adults (Woodward & Fergusson, 2001). 
Many adolescents also experience behavioural 
disorders. Behavioural disorders include 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 
characterized by difficulty paying attention, 
excessive activity and acting without regards 
to consequences, and conduct disorder, 
characterized by destructive or challenging 
behaviours. While all adolescents can be 
distracted, impulsive and risk-takers, those 
with behavioural disorders often have 
significant difficulty regulating their attention, 
emotions and impulses. Furthermore, the 
negative reaction from peers, teachers 
and parents towards these behaviours can 
lead to poor self-esteem and an increase in 
problematic behaviours, trapping adolescents 
in a cycle of negative behaviour and 
worsening outcomes. Behavioural disorders 
are the second leading cause of disability in 
young adolescent boys aged 10-14 years and 
the third leading cause of disability among 
girls aged 10-14 years. Behavioural disorders 
are also the 5 th leading cause of disability in 
boys aged 15-19 years (while no longer being 
a top cause of disability among girls in this age 
group) (UNICEF Country Dashboard, 2019). 
Behavioural disorders put adolescents at-risk 
for school drop-out, substance abuse, and 
criminal behaviour, and can lead to mental 
health, family, social, and economic adversity 
in adulthood (Colman  I,  Murray  J,  Abbott  R 
A, Maughan, 2009).
2.3 Risk Factors for Poor Mental 
Health in Adolescence
Risk factors for adolescent mental health 
problems include genetics, stress, trauma and 
violence, identity issues, family environment, 
poverty, and substance abuse. Other 
important determinants include the quality 
of their home life and relationships with 
peers. Evidence indicates that mental health 
outcomes are caused by a combination of 
these factors, and it is clear that the more risk 
factors adolescents are exposed to, the greater 
the potential impact on their mental health.
2.3.1 Genetic risk factors
Genetic factors, including epigenetic 
regulation (genetic interactions with 
environmental factors) and genetic 
polymorphisms (DNA changes), place people 
at risk for mental health problems. However, 
genetic markers or changes alone will not 
lead to the development of a mental disorder. 
A combination of one or more specific 
polymorphisms and certain environmental 
factors may lead to the development of a 
mental disorder.  Disorders with a strong 
genetic basis include bipolar disorder, 
schizophrenia, and autism spectrum disorder. 
No mental disorder has 100% genetic risk 
and environmental factors often strongly 
influence the development of a particular 
disorder. 
2.3.2 Stress 
Stress is a normal part of life that is often 
harmless (or even helpful). However, the 
intensity, frequency and duration of stress 
will be different for each person in each 
situation. When people are highly stressed, 
neurochemical changes in the body can 
trigger the autonomic nervous system, 
causing the body to react as if it is in danger. 
Numerous factors can make the experience of 
stress worse, including limited social support, 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
11
----- VN022 page 14 -----
difficulty regulating emotions, difficulty 
tolerating uncertainty, lack of self-confidence, 
feeling helpless or overwhelmed, and 
experiencing multiple stressors. When stress 
becomes overwhelming and prolonged, 
the risks for mental health problems and 
medical problems increase. Long-term stress 
increases the risk of mental health problems 
such as anxiety and depression, substance use 
problems, sleep problems, pain and bodily 
complaints such as muscle tension.  
Adolescents often experience stress related 
to academic pressures, family conflict, desire 
for greater autonomy, pressure to conform 
to peers and sexual development. There is 
increasing evidence that adolescent use 
of technology may significantly contribute 
to adolescent stress via cyberbullying, and 
perceived disparity between an adolescent’s 
lived reality and their perceptions of others’ 
experiences online. There is significant 
evidence that stressful life events predict to 
the development of mental health problems 
in adolescence (Reiss, et al., 2019). High levels 
of stress in adolescence have been linked 
to various negative associates, including 
reductions in academic performance (Kaplan 
et al. 2005), school drop-out (Dupéré et al. 
2015), increased mental health problems 
(Snyder et al. 2017), and reduced well-being 
(Chappel et al. 2014).
2.3.3. Trauma
The term “traumatic stress” generally refers to 
the physical and emotional response of an 
individual to life threatening events. In children 
and adolescents, experiences that may cause 
traumatic stress include physical abuse, sexual 
abuse, emotional abuse, neglect, interpersonal 
violence or victimisation, community violence, 
and natural disasters. Children and adolescents 
are especially vulnerable to sexual violence, 
which has a clear association with detrimental 
mental health. Exposure to traumatic events 
is common in youth, with about two thirds of 
children and adolescents around the world 
reporting exposure to at least one traumatic 
event (Saunders & Adams, 2014).
Traumatic stress may cause intense physical 
and emotional reactions, including an 
overwhelming sense of terror, helplessness, 
and horror, and a range of physical sensations 
such as a pounding heart, trembling, dizziness, 
nausea, dry mouth and throat, and loss of 
bladder or bowel control. Exposure to trauma 
can result in serious trauma-related mental 
health problems, including post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD). A meta-analysis of 
studies published from 1998 to 2011 showed 
that 15.9% of children and adolescents 
exposed to a traumatic event developed PTSD 
[10].  Children from low- and middle-income 
countries (LMICs) may be at higher risk for 
trauma exposure and PTSD; a recent study 
found about one third of adolescents living 
in LMICs have some PTSD symptoms after 
experiencing a traumatic event, while nearly 
one in ten have sufficient symptoms for full 
DSM-5 PTSD diagnosis. Adolescents at higher 
risk for trauma include ethnic minority groups, 
homeless youth, children whose parents have 
history of criminal behaviour or mental illness, 
LGBTQ youth, and refugee youth. Exposure 
to violence (including harsh parenting and 
bullying) and socioeconomic problems are 
also recognized risks to mental health. 
Early childhood experiences of abuse and 
neglect by parents or caregivers put children 
at high risk for mental health problems 
later in life. Healthy, responsive attachment 
with parents is critically important for child 
development. When parents consistently 
respond to children’s basic needs with 
emotional sensitivity children are able to 
grow up feeling safe and able to explore the 
world. Parental abuse, including emotional 
abuse, and neglect cause significant “toxic” 
stress in the developing infant/child, severely 
impacting cognitive, social and emotional 
development. In addition, the biological stress-
response system can be negatively impacted 
by early abuse and neglect, are increasing 
risk for anxiety, depression, substance abuse, 
and chronic health impairments. These early 
harmful experiences also associated with 
poor impulse control, high negativity, learning 
difficulties and poor school achievement later 
in life. (Lippard & Nemeroff, 2020)
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
12

----- VN022 page 15 -----
2.3.4. Family-Based Risk and Protective 
Factors
Studies from around the world have found 
that positive family functioning and parental 
involvement in adolescents’ lives is associated 
with reduced risk for poor mental [19, 35, Chia 
et al., 2020], while a lack of parental warmth 
and high parental over-control are associated 
with a wide range of psychological problems, 
including depression, suicidal behaviour, and 
self-harm among adolescents [36,37,38].  
In Viet Nam, parental involvement, 
monitoring, and interest in adolescents’ 
free time were significantly associated with 
reduced likelihood of adolescent bullying 
victimization and mental health problems. 
However, high levels of parental control 
were associated with higher likelihood 
of adolescents being physically attacked, 
loneliness and mental health problems 
including suicidal ideation (Nguyen, et al., 
2019).
2.3.5. Environmental Risks
Some adolescents are at greater risk of 
mental health conditions due to their living 
situations, stigma, discrimination or exclusion, 
or lack of access to quality support and 
services. These include adolescents living in 
humanitarian and fragile settings; adolescents 
with chronic illness, pregnant adolescents, 
adolescent parents, or those in early and/or 
forced marriages; orphans; and adolescents 
from minority ethnic, gender identity, sexual 
orientation or other discriminated groups. 
There is also emerging evidence that early 
exposure to air pollution places children at 
higher risk for emotional and behavioural 
problems (Salma, Ahmed, Gita, et al., 2022).
Poverty, or family economic stress, has 
predicted adolescent mental health problems 
in many countries, including Germany (Reiss, 
2019), China (Xu, et al, 2019), and the US 
(Assing-Murray & Lebrun-Harris, 2020). Ethnic 
minority status is associated with increased 
risk for mental health problems (Bains, S. & 
Gutman, L., 2021) and experiences of racism 
and discrimination have a profound impact 
on the mental health of ethnic minority 
children and adolescents (Trent, Dooley, & 
Dougé, 2019). Sexual minority adolescents are 
at greater risk for depression and other mental 
health problems relative to their heterosexual 
peers (Marshal, MP ,  Dietz LJ,  Friedman, et al., 
2011) and sexual minority adolescents are at 
greater risk for suicidality (Luk, et al., 2021).
2.3.6. COVID-19 Risk Factors
The COVID-19 pandemic has been 
catastrophic, resulting in over 2 million deaths 
worldwide and focusing billions into social 
isolation. Estimates of global mental health 
problems among adults indicate that the 
prevalence of major depressive disorder rose 
by 27.6% in 2020, indicating an additional 53.2 
million cases of major depressive disorder 
globally.  It is estimated that general anxiety 
disorder rates increased 25.6% globally during 
2020, reflecting an additional 76.2 million 
cases around the world. (Lancet COVID-19 
Mental Disorders Collaborators, 2021). 
Adolescents are at particular risk due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Ongoing stress regarding 
family functioning, economic insecurity, fears 
of infection, social isolation, and disrupted 
schooling has had a significant psychological 
toll on adolescent mental health. Family 
illness and death due to COVID-19 have 
caused traumatic stress for many children 
and youth around the world. Violence in the 
home, including intimate partner violence 
and physical abuse of children, has increased 
during the pandemic putting children and 
adolescents at physical and psychological 
risk. In addition, adolescents have spent 
significantly more time online where they have 
often been exposed to stressful information 
about the pandemic and to online abuse and 
cyberbullying. These are all serious challenges 
given that adolescents are still developing 
the capacity for resilience and coping putting 
young people at greater risk for pandemic-
related mental health problems. And given 
that mental health problems in adolescence 
put people at risk for poor mental health and 
physical health outcomes over the lifetime, 
it is crucial that adolescent mental health is 
prioritized during the pandemic. 
Adolescents with prior mental health 
problems are a heightened risk for pandemic-
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
13
----- VN022 page 16 -----
related mental health problems. Experiences 
of isolation, feelings of uncertainty, lack of daily 
routines, lack of access to health services may 
also put young people at risk for psychosocial 
difficulties. Jones, Mitra, & Bhuiyan (2021) 
conducted a systematic review of 16 
quantitative studies conducted in 2019–2021 
with 40,076 participants. Globally, adolescents 
of varying backgrounds are experiencing 
higher rates of anxiety, depression, and stress 
due to the pandemic. Adolescents also have 
a higher frequency of alcohol and cannabis 
use during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, 
social support, positive coping skills, home 
quarantining, and parent–child discussions 
seem to positively impact adolescent mental 
health during this period of crisis.
A qualitative study of adolescents in Nha 
Trang and Vinh, Viet Nam revealed factors 
affecting mental health and well-being during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Findings showed 
that school closures and online learning had 
the largest impact on students’ well-being 
and academic performance. Findings further 
indicated that adolescents were at increased 
risk for exposure to harmful or addictive 
internet content due to increased time spent 
online. Teens were also exposed to a large 
amount of COVID-19 news, which heightened 
their feelings of fear and anxiety. Students 
reported feelings of sadness and depression, 
as well as social anxiety after time away from 
friends and socialization. Girls were especially 
at-risk to thinking related to a negative body-
image. Adolescents reported that their parents 
were concerned about the quality of online 
learning, and thus pushed their children 
harder to perform academically often leading 
to family tensions (Samuels, Ho, Nguyen et al., 
2021). 
2.4 Global Child and Adolescent 
Mental Health Treatment Gap
In low-income settings globally, only a tiny 
fraction of people suffering from poor mental 
health will ever have access to psychiatric or 
psychological support. Although effective 
interventions to reduce mental health 
symptoms exist, many sufferers do not receive 
mental health care. As much as 76–85% of 
people in need of treatment in LMICs do not 
receive any treatment at all (Patel  et al.  2011; 
WHO,  2013). Evidence indicates that the 
situation may even be worse; Patel  found a 
treatment gap exceeding 90% for common 
mental disorders and alcohol use disorders 
in India and China, two relatively well-
resourced middle-income countries (Fairburn 
& Patel,  2016).  The lack of a mental health 
policy, mental health programmes and 
mental health legislation in many countries, 
as well as limited resources (both financial and 
human), a limited infrastructure, stigma and 
shame are important reasons for low uptake 
and dissemination of mental health care 
(WHO, 2008; Munoz et al. 2016).
Children and adolescents face a particularly 
large treatment gap (Morris, et al, 2011). 
Lack of adequate  child and adolescent 
mental health  (CAMH) services across the 
world was reported in the WHO Child and 
Adolescent Mental Health Atlas (World Health 
Organization, 2005).  Worldwide, there are 
very few child and adolescent psychiatrists; 
in high-income countries the number of 
child psychiatrists is 1.19 per 100,000 youth, 
but in LMICs, where the preponderance of 
the world’s children and adolescents live, 
the number is <  0.1 per 100,000 population 
(Skokauskas et al., 2019), a higher rate of unmet 
needs in CAMH training and a wider gap 
between CAMH needs and available CAMH 
services in low- and middle-income countries 
compared with high-income countries 
(Morris et al., 2011). It is also reported that, in 
comparison with Europe and North America, 
there have been substantial unmet needs for 
CAMH resources in Asia, in view of the rapidly 
growing numbers of youngsters who require 
mental health evaluation and ongoing care. In 
2017, Vietnam reported just 900 psychiatrists 
and only 10 psychiatrists specialized in CAMH. 
Vietnam lacks a National Child and Adolescent 
Mental Health Policy has a need for increased 
CAMH specialist psychiatrists and specialists. 
(Hirota, Guerrero, & Skokauskas, 2020). Along 
with the health sector, there is a global and 
Vietnam-specific gap in educational and 
social sector support for child and adolescent 
mental health. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
14

----- VN022 page 17 -----
2.5 Schools and Adolescent 
Mental Health and Well-being
Schools play a large role in children’s lives 
and have a direct impact on children’s 
mental health and well-being. The school 
environment, learning experiences, and 
teacher and peer relationships may either put 
children at risk for mental health problems, 
or protect them and promote positive well-
being. With schools instrumental to children’s 
mental health and well-being, and with 
mental health and well-being crucial to both 
academic and developmental success, it is 
important to understand the links between 
school factors, mental health and well-being, 
and academic performance.
2.5.1 School-Based Mental Health Risk 
Factors
A number of school factors are associated 
with student mental health and well-being. 
School climate, academic pressure and 
peer relationships, including experiences 
of bullying, have all been found to impact 
student mental health. 
2.5.1.1. School Climate
Over the past two decades, school climate 
has emerged as a unifying construct that 
focuses on a variety of environmental and 
experiential school experiences and seeks to 
better understand how those experiences 
shape student academic, behavioural, and 
socioemotional outcomes. Efforts to define 
key aspects of school climate have resulted in 
a 3-factor model of school climate, including 
13 subdomains: safety (perceived safety, 
bullying and aggression, and drug use); 
engagement (connection to teachers, student 
connectedness, academic engagement, 
school connectedness, equity, and parent 
engagement); and environment (rules and 
consequences, physical comfort, and support, 
disorder) (Bradshaw, Waasdorp, Debnam, & 
Johnson, 2014). One serious aspect of school 
climate is corporal punishment which is still 
widely used in schools in many parts of the 
world. Children who are physically or sexually 
abused, harassed or humiliated by teachers 
often develop emotional and behavioural 
problems (Hinze, 2021). The resulting 
psychological stress also impacts negatively 
on students’ cognitive skills and academic 
performance.
A recent meta-analysis by Wang and colleagues 
(2020) examined 61 international studies 
published between 2000-2016 and found that 
classroom climate was positively associated 
with student social competence, motivation 
and engagement, and academic achievement 
and negatively associated with socioemotional 
distress and externalizing behaviours (Wang, 
Degol, Amemiyaa, & Guoc, 2020). A study 
conducted in South Australia found that 
students’ perceptions of their school climate 
were positively associated with student well-
being, resilience and moral identity (Riekie, 
Aldridge, & Afari, 2016). In consideration of 
these findings, a growing number of countries 
(e.g., Canada, China, England, France, Germany, 
Israel, Singapore, United States) have focused 
on improving classroom climate as a central 
goal of educational reform initiatives in order 
to promote school quality and student’s 
academic and psychological well-being 
(Wang, Degol, Amemiyaa, & Guoc, 2020).
2.5.1.2. Academic Pressure
Research indicates that students around 
the world commonly report high levels of 
academic-related stress (Pascoe, Hetrick 
& Parker , 2020). The Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) conducted a survey involving 72 
countries and consisting of 540,000 student 
respondents aged 15–16  years (Peña-López, 
2016). On average, 66% of students reported 
feeling stressed about poor grades and 59% 
reported that they often worry that taking a 
test will be difficult. The OECD further found 
that 55% of students feel very anxious about 
school testing, even when they are well 
prepared. As many 37% of students reported 
feeling very tense when studying, with girls 
consistently reporting greater anxiety relating 
to schoolwork compared to boys. This data 
demonstrates that education and academic 
performance are a significant source of stress 
to students.
Academic-related stress experienced by 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
15
----- VN022 page 18 -----
secondary students impacts their mental 
and physical health and leads to a range 
of academic problems. In a study of 
adolescent students in India, adolescents 
who had academic stress were at 2.4 times 
higher risk of depression than adolescents 
without academic stress. Self-expectations 
and perceived pressure from parents and 
teachers were the main causes of academic 
stress. Adolescent girls had higher academic 
stress than boys ( Jayanthi, Thirunavukarasu, 
& Rajkumar, 2015). The OECD study reported 
above found that anxiety about schoolwork, 
homework and tests has a negative impact on 
students’ academic performance in science, 
mathematics and reading (Peña-López, 2016).
Academic-related stress is strongly related to 
decreased student academic motivation and 
academic disengagement. A longitudinal 
study of 298 Chinese secondary school 
students found that academic-related stress 
in Grade 10 negatively predicted intrinsic 
academic motivation and positively predicted 
lack of motivation in Grade 12. This indicates 
that decreasing academic-related stress might 
preserve students’ ongoing intrinsic academic 
motivation (Liu,  2015).  The relationship 
between academic-related stress, motivation 
and dropout does not appear to be culturally 
specific, with similar findings shown from 
a number of international studies (Pascoe, 
Hetrick & Parker, 2020; Walburg, 2014). Another 
study in China examined the longitudinal 
relationships between adolescents’ stress in 
school and the change rates of their academic 
achievement. The results indicated that for 
students whose academic achievement 
significantly declined over time, the students’ 
stress from teacher–student interactions 
significantly predicted the change rates of 
their academic achievement. The findings 
provided support to the notion that stress is a 
risk factor in students’ academic development 
(Liu & Lu, 2011).
2.5.1.3. School Relationships
Healthy, positive relationships are critical for 
student mental health and well-being. Lack 
of friendships and bullying are two factors 
that put adolescent students at risk for mental 
health problems. Adolescents are more likely 
to have suicidal thoughts when they feel 
lonely. Previous studies done in Lebanon, 
Uganda, Tanzania, Sub-Saharan Africa reveal 
that children are more likely to have suicidal 
ideation when they have feeling of loneliness 
(Mahfoud, Afifi, Haddad, & DeJong, 2011; 
Rudatsikira, Muula, Siziya, & Twa-Twa, 2007; 
Dunlavy, Aquah, & Wilson, 2015; Page & West, 
2011). Adolescent students in Nepal who 
experienced loneliness were at higher risk for 
suicidal ideation, while having 3 or more close 
friends was found to be a protective factor 
(Pandey, Bista, Dhungana, Aryal, Chalise, & 
Dhimal, 2019). 
Victimization by bullying and cyberbullying 
is another relationship factor that puts 
students at risk for poor mental health and 
well-being. A study of students in Chile and 
South Africa found that bullying victimization 
was a significant predictor of children’s well-
being (Varela, Savahl, Adams & Reyes, 2019). 
Research indicates that bullying is a key factor 
for adolescent mental health in Viet Nam. In a 
study of bullying and mental health among 
secondary and high school students in Viet 
Nam, bullying victimization independently 
predicted student mental health problems and 
mental health problems predicted students’ 
experience of becoming victims of bullying. 
Girls with mental health problems were more 
likely to be victims; whereas boys with mental 
health problems were vulnerable to both 
being bullied and being perpetrators (Le et al., 
2019). Another study of adolescent students 
in Viet Nam found that bullying was more 
common in junior high school compared to 
senior high school. (Nguyen, Nakamura, Seino, 
et al., 2019)
2.5.2. Student Mental Health and 
Academic Success
Aside from impairing overall health and well-
being, depression and anxiety symptoms 
can further adversely affect academic 
achievement (Bernal-Morales, Rodríguez-
Landa, & Pulido-Criollo,  2015).  Adolescent 
depression has a significant negative impact 
on school performance and puts students at 
risk for poor educational and occupational 
outcomes. A 25-year longitudinal study of New 
Zealand children found that people who had 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
16

----- VN022 page 19 -----
depression at ages 16–21 had greater rates 
of welfare dependence and unemployment, 
demonstrating that the impact of poor 
mental health in adolescence can have 
long-lasting impacts (Fergusson, Boden, & 
Horwood,  2007). Research in the UK of 7 th-9th 
grade students found a strong relationship 
between student depression symptoms 
and grade point average, with a stronger 
association for boys compared to girls. Higher 
depressive symptoms were associated with 
lower academic achievement at age 16 years. 
Depression was associated with difficulties in 
concentration, social relationships, self-reliant 
school performance and reading and writing 
as well as perceiving schoolwork as highly 
loading. This study indicates that students 
reporting difficulties in academic performance 
should be screened for depression (Lopez-
Lopez, et al., 2021)
Several key symptoms of depression, such as 
impaired ability to concentrate, loss of interest, 
poor initiative, psychomotor retardation, 
low self-esteem, sense of worthlessness, and 
social withdrawal may significantly disturb 
cognitive performance and diminish initiative 
in learning (Wagner, Müller, Helmreich,  et 
al., 2015). Depression may impair cognitive 
functioning because the depressed adolescent 
concentrates on depressive thoughts and 
interpretations instead of the actual tasks, or 
because depression directly blocks cognitive 
resources, or due to both reasons (Hartlage, 
Alloy, Va´ zquez, & Dykman, 1993). 
2.5.3. School-Based Interventions
Schools provide an ideal setting for adolescent 
mental health and well-being promotion. The 
OECD highlights that schools are places where 
young people develop many of the social and 
emotional skills needed to become resilient 
and thrive (OECD,  2015). With more than 66% 
of children in secondary school age were 
enrolled in secondary schools worldwide in 
2018, school-based programmes can reach 
many groups of adolescents and parents 
(UNESCO, February 2020). Moreover, school-
based mental health services have been 
associated with a lower stigma and a greater 
utilization rate, especially among ethnic 
minority adolescents (Stephan et al. 2007). As 
such, school-based intervention programmes 
provide a promising environment for 
preventative and low-threshold care, with the 
potential to also reach adolescents who are 
reluctant to search for care outside the school 
environment or who live in communities 
without other care options. Since mental health 
and psychosocial functioning is beneficial for 
academic performance and school success, 
schools may benefit from implementing 
interventions that aim to improve social and 
emotional functioning.
A number of school-based adolescent mental 
health and well-being programmes have been 
developed and evaluated around the world. 
Programmes tend to fall into two categories, 
including universal prevention or intervention 
programmes (i.e., targeting all students) and 
selective or indicated (i.e., targeting students 
at risk) school-based interventions. A number 
of large-scale reviews and meta-analyses have 
examined the scope and efficacy of school-
based programmes (Wells, Barlow, Stewart-
Brown, 2003; van Loon et al., 2020; Greenberg, 
Domitrovich & Bumbarger, 2000; Hoagwood 
et al., 2007; Kraag, Zeegers, Kok, Hosman & 
Abu-Saad,  2006). The literature emphasizes the 
academic benefits of mental health promotion 
in schools and there is strong evidence for 
the effectiveness of interventions to support 
positive gains in students’ social-emotional 
and academic outcomes (Fazel, Hoagwood, 
Stephan & Ford, 2014; Sancassiani et al., 2015). 
2.5.3.1. Universal School-Based Programmes
Universal approaches to school-based 
mental health promotion include a variety 
of intervention types. Some aim to change the 
culture of the school, enabling, for example, 
teachers to adopt a different approach to 
discipline in order to ensure violence free 
classrooms, or students to reduce bullying 
behaviour. Others are class-based and aim to 
deliver a specific curriculum to all children in 
the class. Some programmes have combined 
whole school and class-based interventions. 
The content of school-based mental health 
promotion interventions varies greatly, 
and programmes may be aimed violence 
prevention, social-emotional cognitive skill 
building, or suicide prevention. Methods of 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
17
----- VN022 page 20 -----
delivery have included techniques to change 
behaviours or teach skills, involvement in 
co-operative or helping activities, training of 
teachers or parents, and changes in the school 
environment, systems or culture. Methods 
of implementation range from a curriculum 
confined to the classroom, to ongoing 
changes in the school, to the involvement of 
parents and the community. (Wells, Barlow & 
Stewart-Brown, 2003). Policy and legislation 
prohibiting the use of physical discipline by 
teachers and school staff are a key intervention 
aimed at making schools and classrooms safer 
for students. 
Universal school-based programmes have 
demonstrated effective student stress 
reduction with some mixed results. Kraag et 
al. (2006) found that universal interventions 
for the general school population effectively 
reduced student stress. However, Loon et al 
(2020) found that school-based intervention 
programmes reduced academic stress for 
subsets of students. Differences in findings may 
be attributed to the younger ages of students 
in Kraag (ages 9-14) compared to Loon (10 – 
18) with younger children benefiting more 
universally from school-based interventions.  
The Kraag meta-analysis 19 randomized 
controlled trials or quasi-experimental studies 
found that school programmes targeting 
stress management or coping skills reduced 
stress symptoms and improved coping skills 
among students (Kraag, Zeegers, Kok, Hosman 
& Abu-Saad,  2006). Das, Salam, Lassi and 
colleagues (2016) reviewed meta-analyses 
of school-based adolescent mental health 
interventions. Findings indicated that factors 
related to overall programme success include 
a focus on  mental health promotion rather 
than on mental illness prevention. While there 
is scant evidence from LMICs, existing research 
suggests that the majority of the school-based 
life skills and resilience programmes indicated 
positive effects on students’ self-esteem, 
motivation, and self-efficacy,  (Das, Salam, 
Lassi, et al., 2016). 
The Strengthening Evidence base on School-
based Interventions for Promoting Adolescent 
Health (SEHER) project has been studied 
extensively in Bihar, India. The programme 
is a multicomponent health promotion 
intervention that includes whole school–, 
class-, and individual-focused components 
to promote school climate and the health 
and well-being of adolescents in secondary 
schools. The programme was evaluated in a 
trial involving 74 schools and was delivered 
either by a lay counsellor or by an existing 
teacher. The intervention included whole 
school–, class-, and individual-focused 
components. Students enrolled in grade 
9 (aged 13–15 years) were exposed to the 
intervention for two years. Evaluation 8 
months post-programme showed significant 
results when the programme was delivered 
by a lay counsellor on school climate, 
depression, bullying, attitude toward gender 
equity, violence victimization, and violence 
perpetration. The effect sizes for these 
outcomes at end of year 2 were larger than at 
the end of year 1. Study findings provide strong 
evidence of the benefits of a multicomponent 
school health promotion intervention, when 
delivered by lay counsellor, on school climate 
and a range of health and well-being outcomes 
of adolescents. No effects were seen when the 
same intervention was delivered by teachers. 
The SEHER intervention was compared to the 
classroom Adolescence Education Programme 
(AEP), which teaches life skills, which did not 
show any effects (Shinde, et al., 2020). One 
important finding was that school climate 
mediated the effects of the intervention on all 
three outcomes of interest. A nurturing school 
environment, characterized by supportive 
and engaged relationships with teachers 
and peers, a sense of belonging, and active 
participation in school climate predicted lower 
rates of depressive symptoms, experiences of 
bullying, and perpetration of violence. 
2.5.3.2. Example Programmes from Viet Nam
Dang and colleagues (2016) adapted and 
evaluated a universal classroom-based mental 
health and social skills programme for primary 
school students. The programme, RECAP-VN, 
is a semi-structured programme that provides 
students with classroom social skills training, 
and teachers with in-classroom consultation 
on programme implementation and 
classroom-wide behaviour management. The 
study found that the programme had a positive 
effect on both social skills and mental health 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
18

----- VN022 page 21 -----
functioning. Significant treatment effects 
were found on both social skills (for low-risk 
students) and mental health functioning (for 
both low- and -high-risk students). While this 
programme was for younger children, results 
show promise for effective implementation 
of universal school-based mental health 
programmes in Viet Nam. 
Dang, Weiss, Lam, and Ho (2018) also adapted 
and evaluated a high‐school problem‐solving 
programme called Viet Nam ACES ProS. The 
ACES ProS programme was tested in Danang 
with 100 Vietnamese High school students. 
Findings indicate that the programme had 
a positive impact on students reported 
emotional and behavioural problems. The 
authors discussed issues of programme 
cultural adaptation related to successful 
implementation.  
2.5.3.3. Selective School-Based Programmes
Selective or indicated school-based 
intervention programmes are provided for 
students deemed at-risk for various reasons. 
These programmes may include classrooms of 
students all considered at-risk, or may remove 
subgroups of students from regular class in 
order to participate in the programme. To 
reduce stress and improve the well-being of 
adolescents, these programmes offer different 
approaches and apply various hypothesized 
mechanisms of change. For example, 
mindfulness (i.e., bringing non-judgmental 
attention to the present moment through 
meditation techniques and awareness 
exercises), relaxation exercises (e.g., progressive 
relaxation, muscle relaxation, visualization-
based relaxation) and life skills training, 
comprising different cognitive-behavioural 
techniques (e.g., emotion regulation, problem-
solving, conflict resolution), are often used.
Evidence from school-based interventions 
suggests that targeted group-based 
interventions and school programmes based 
on cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) were 
found to be effective in reducing  depressive 
symptoms and anxiety (Das, Salam, Lassi, et 
al., 2016). However, with most of the evidence 
coming from high income countries (HICs), 
generalizability of the findings for LMICs is 
limited. Michelson and colleagues (2020) 
tested a mental health service for adolescents 
in LMICs called PRemIum for aDoLEscents 
(PRIDE) among students aged 12-20 years in 
India. Findings support a low-cost delivery 
mechanism of a problem-solving intervention 
for common mental health problems. Within 
this programme students with elevated 
mental health symptoms were referred for 
support and received comic booklets about 
problems solving and how to cope with 
common difficulties. This alone resulted in 
reductions in overall mental health symptoms 
including internalizing and externalizing 
symptoms, improved functioning and 
improved well-being. Students who then 
received lay counsellor support showed 
greater reduction in adolescent problems 
and in perceived stress. Counsellor training 
included a written manual describing the 
problem-solving intervention, 5 days of office-
based training, 6 weeks of supervised practice, 
and 3 top-up training days at monthly intervals 
while the trial was underway. Counsellors also 
participated in sensitization activities aimed 
at promoting awareness and acceptability of 
counselling activities among school staff and 
pupils.
2.5.3.4. School-Based MHPSS Programme 
Implementation Success Factors 
No matter how successful a programme may 
be when evaluated, there are many reasons 
why programmes fail to succeed or are no 
longer offered over time. Implementation 
concerns are illustrated by a study of the 
FRIENDS school-based universal prevention 
programme in the UK. Study results 
demonstrated the efficacy of the programme 
on reducing student anxiety and depression 
(Stallard, Simpson, Anderson, & Goddard, 2008). 
However, the programme relied on significant 
input from training professionals, such as 
clinical psychologists and school counsellors, 
making the programme difficult and costly to 
implement as part of routine practice within 
schools. Follow-up revealed that the majority 
of participating schools failed to continue 
implementing the programme after the four-
year trial. These findings affirm the need for 
innovative school-based programmes that are 
less time and resource intensive, as well as less 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
19
----- VN022 page 22 -----
reliant on outside monitoring and support for 
compliance and implementation. 
School-based mental health programme 
research points to programme implementation 
factors that increase the probability of 
programme sustainability and ongoing quality. 
These key programme components include 
(a) consistent programme implementation; 
(b) inclusion of parents, teachers, or peers in 
programmes; (c) use of multiple modalities 
(e.g., the combination of informational 
presentations with cognitive and behavioural 
skill training); (d) feedback, consultation, and 
support to teachers (e.g., refresher training 
sessions, classroom observation, small group 
discussions) and (e) integration of programme 
content into general classroom curriculum; and 
(f ) developmentally appropriate programme 
components (Rones & Hoagwood, 2000). The 
most successful interventions were more likely 
to be mental health-promoting programmes 
which were provided continuously over 
extensive periods of time, i.e. a year or 
longer  and that aim to involve everyone in 
the school including students, staff,  families 
and the  community, and to change the 
environment and culture of the school. These 
approaches may require changes in teachers’ 
attitudes, beliefs or behaviour  (Wells, Barlow, 
Stewart-Brown, 2003).
2.5.3.5. Technology and adolescent mental 
health interventions
Technology offers potential value for 
making selective adolescent mental health 
interventions readily available to students in 
LMICs. Barriers to uptake and dissemination 
of mental health care include a lack in 
mental health policies and programmes, 
limited resources (both financial and human), 
limited infrastructure, stigma and shame. 
As internet penetration and mobile phone 
ownership in particular is increasing globally, 
digital technologies offer an opportunity to 
overcome several of these barriers. Internet 
and smartphone ownership is increasing 
globally with an estimated 81% of people 
(6.37 billon users) owning a smartphone in 
2021. In Viet Nam, there is an estimated 63.1% 
smartphone penetration with about 61.37 
million out of 97.34 million people owning a 
smartphone (Pew Research Centre, 2019)  
Examples of mental health technology include 
MoodGYM, an interactive, online, self-directed 
CBT programme designed to prevent and/or 
reduce symptoms of anxiety and depression. 
The programme has been used by over three-
quarters of million people since 2001 and has 
demonstrated significant reduction in anxiety 
and depression in adolescents up to 17 years 
old (Calear, Christensen, Mackinnon, Griffiths, 
& O’Kearney, 2009; Fairburn & Patel,  2016). 
Another unguided computerized CBT 
programme is TreadWill. This programme was 
designed to be fully automated, engaging, 
easy to use, and accessible in LMICs. An 
evaluation of TreadWill’s effectiveness and 
engagement level was performed in a double-
blind, randomized controlled trial with 598 
adult participants in India (Ghosh A, Cherian 
RJ, Wagle S, et al., 2021). The use of TreadWill 
significantly reduced depression-related and 
anxiety-related symptoms. Overall, online 
specialized programmes for mental health 
show promise as scalable interventions. The 
primary concern is that adherence rates are 
low. For example, the TreadWill evaluation 
found that 12.1% of participants engaged 
with moderate usage, and 5.5% engaged with 
full completion. 
In Viet Nam, Sobowale  et al.  (2016) explored 
the perceptions of Vietnamese youth and 
parents towards digital interventions for youth 
mental health as a first step to implement 
internet-based treatment in Viet Nam. Findings 
suggest that internet-based programmes for 
youth mental health, particularly interventions 
incorporating psychoeducation and social 
networking components, will be well received 
in Viet Nam. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
20

----- VN022 page 23 -----
Chapter 3 
Adolescent Mental Health in 
Viet Nam Literature Review
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
21
----- VN022 page 24 -----
3.1. Context of Viet Nam
The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has a 
population of over 96 million people. One of 
the top three Southeast Asian countries with 
high GDP growth, Viet Nam is experiencing 
rapid socio-economical changes in society, 
such as increased internal migration from rural 
to urban areas, changes in family structure, 
and changes in roles of parents in modernized 
families. In spite of these changes, most (65.6%) 
of the country’s 96 million people continue 
to live in rural areas and rely on subsistence 
agriculture. The average annual household 
income per capita was $2,236 in 2019, with 
major disparities between urban and rural 
areas. (2021 CEIC Data). Gross primary school 
enrolment is high at 117% as of 2020 (World 
Bank).
There are 54 ethnic groups in Viet Nam, with 
the Kinh constituting the majority of the 
population (84%). Some ethnic groups are 
small, with less than 1,000 members, and 
apart from the Hoa (Chinese) group, ethnic 
minorities are disproportionately poor, less 
educated and generally live in more remote 
locations. Members of ethnic minority groups 
make up 15% of the country’s population but 
account for 70 percent of the extreme poor 
(measured using a national extreme poverty 
line).  There is significant evidence of health 
inequalities facing ethnic minority groups. 
Governmental policies and programmes have 
not been culturally adapted and sensitive, 
and there are reports of bad attitudes and 
discrimination from health staff toward 
minority people. At the same time, there 
are examples of traditions and patriarchic 
structures within ethnic minority groups that 
also maintain harmful health behaviours. 
(Badiani-Magnusson et al., 2012; Malqvist et 
al., 2013)
3.2 Mental Health Care and 
Treatment in Viet Nam
The mental healthcare industry in Viet Nam is 
still developing. Until recently mental health 
care and treatment in Viet Nam was provided 
almost exclusively by the health sector 
(primarily for only the most severe mental 
illnesses). The educational sector developed 
school counselling policies starting in 2005 
and the social sector adopted community 
mental health policies beginning in 2011. See 
Chapter 7 for more detail about the mental 
health related policies and programmes of 
each Ministry. The Vietnamese government 
has established the National Mental Health 
Programme (NMHP), however the NMHP 
only covers approximately 30 percent of 
the country and only includes a limited list 
of mental illnesses. While the government 
estimates that approximately 15 percent of 
the population requires mental health care 
services, independent research suggests that 
the figure is closer to 20 to 30 percent of the 
population (Mah, 2018).
The World Health Organization (WHO) 
surveyed the country in 2014 and found that 
only 0.91 psychiatrists were available per 
100,000 people. The psychiatrists available 
per 100,000 population in Viet Nam is 
comparable to its ASEAN neighbours: Malaysia 
has 0.76 psychiatrists available per 100,000 
people and Thailand has 0.87 psychiatrists 
for 100,000 people. However, it is far behind 
developed economies like Singapore, with 
3.48 psychiatrists per 100,000 people, and 
the US, where there are 12.40 psychiatrists 
available per 100,000 people. The Department 
of Psychiatry at Ha Noi Medical University 
and the National Institute of Mental Health 
provide programmes for psychiatrists in 
training. General medical students can choose 
to do a one-year specialization in psychiatry—
although interest remains low relative to other 
medical fields. There are very few child and 
adolescent mental health providers in Viet 
Nam (Dang & Weiss, 2012).
The medical mental health network includes 
inpatient programmes and outpatient 
treatment for psychiatric care. The psychiatric 
hospital system in Viet Nam has 36 hospitals 
established across the country, with 
approximately 6,000 beds. The system delivers 
services through a network of state-owned 
hospitals; there are two National Psychiatric 
Hospitals, one located in the north in Ha Noi 
and the other in Bien Hoa city in the south. 
The remaining 34 provincial psychiatric 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
22

----- VN022 page 25 -----
hospitals are disseminated across the 
country. Hospitalization for patients in severe 
conditions, typically schizophrenia, bipolar 
disorder and epilepsy, are given the care in 
these inpatient hospitals. Access is also limited 
by geographic distribution of providers as 
psychiatrists are stationed at psychiatric 
hospitals, where mental health care is centred. 
Viet Nam has about 600 outpatient mental 
healthcare facilities available for locals who are 
looking for short-term care. These outpatient 
facilities are primarily located in the major 
urban centres of the country.
The Viet Nam Ministry of Health has begun 
expanding community outreach through 
primary care facilities to reach those afflicted 
with mental illness. However, effectiveness of 
treatment in primary care is limited by lack 
of adequate training to screen for mental 
disorders and the community expansion 
initiative primarily focuses on schizophrenia 
and epilepsy, which are not the most common 
mental illnesses in Vietnamese youth (Ng  et 
al.,  2011). Since 2015, the MOH has expanded 
its target programme to reach people 
suffering from anxiety and depression, and 
pediatric patients with autism and attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder. These efforts 
have faced many challenges due to the health 
sector’s lack of training and experience in child 
and adolescent mental health (Cuong, 2017).  
Stigma is a serious barrier to mental health care 
and treatment in Viet Nam. Mental disorders are 
sometimes imbued with shame and disgrace 
in the country, which can prevent individuals 
from speaking openly about their distress. 
For example, “bác sĩ tâm thần” is Vietnamese 
for psychiatrist; however, it directly translates 
in English to “doctors who treat madness.” 
Mental disorders are often viewed as signs of 
personal or familial weakness. Discrimination 
towards people with mental illness can result 
in difficulties finding employment, getting 
married or even having family members get 
married. 
A study conducted by the UK-based 
Young Lives Project found that poverty-
related stressors compromise healthy child 
development (Thang & Hang, 2018). Across 
both urban and rural areas, vulnerable youths 
and women lack adequate resources for their 
needs. Care is especially lacking for those 
living in rural areas that do not have accessible 
transport to major cities – like Ha Noi and 
Ho Chi Minh City – where services are more 
widely available. However, the limited number 
of mental health care professionals currently 
working in the field are unable to provide 
the demands vulnerable segments of the 
population need, especially when resources 
are limited.
3.3 Adolescent Mental Health 
Problems in Viet Nam
3.3.1. Studies of Depression, Anxiety and 
Behavioural Problems 
Studies of adolescent mental health in Viet Nam 
indicate that Vietnamese youth experience a 
significant burden of mental illness. Research 
on the prevalence of adolescent mental health 
problems in Viet Nam have found varying rates. 
Weiss et al., (2014) conducted a nationally 
representative mental health epidemiological 
study of 1,314 children 6 to 16 years of age 
from 60 sites across Viet Nam and estimate that 
12% of the child and adolescent population 
(over 3 million young people) have a mental 
health problem in needs of services. This study 
found higher rates of emotional problems in 
girls compared to boys, and higher rates of 
behavioural problems in boys. In this study 
higher socioeconomic status was associated 
with higher rates of ADHD symptoms. 
In a study of parental styles and mental 
health problems among Vietnamese high 
school students from Ha Noi, Hue and HCMC, 
16.4% of 757 participants reported mental 
health problems. Findings showed that 
being female, being in grade 12, and having 
an overprotective mother were risk factors 
to mental problems while father’s warmth 
reduced the risk of having mental problems 
among adolescents. (La et al., 2020). 
A study of 1,161 students aged 15–19 
years examined the burden of mental 
health problems among secondary school 
students in Can Tho City, Viet Nam. The 
prevalence of clinically significant symptoms 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
23
----- VN022 page 26 -----
of depression and anxiety were 41.1% and 
22.8%, respectively. (Nguyen et al., 2013). 
Female students had three times the odds 
of having anxiety symptoms as compared to 
male students. In another study of adolescent 
depression, Nguyen and colleagues (2013) 
found that 18.7% of 1,100 high school students 
had depressive symptoms consistent with 
major depressive disorder. According to the 
Survey Assessment Vietnamese Youth (SAVY 
I), 32% of 14-25-year-old reported feeling sad 
about their life in general (MOH, 2005).
A study of over 4,500 youth in Ha Noi, including 
a high percentage of migrants, found a 
6-month prevalence of depression of 36% 
(Nguyen  et al., 2012). Depression was positively 
associated with current drinking: the higher 
likelihood of depression, the more likely one 
drinks. A risk factor for depression in this study 
was migration status, with adolescents who 
had migrated to Ha Noi showing higher rates 
of depression compared to non-migrants. 
Variable prevalence rates across studies may 
be due to study methodical factors, including 
different sample sizes, tools and research 
methods. It also may be that studies only 
looking at adolescents in major urban centres 
find higher rates of mental health problems 
(e.g., Nguyen et al., 2012) compared to studies 
that include children living in rural areas (e.g., 
Weiss et al., 2014). Robust adolescent mental 
health prevalence data is expected soon via 
a National Adolescent Mental Health Survey 
(Erskine et al., 2021). 
3.3.2. Studies of Suicide Risk
Of great concern is the risk of adolescent 
suicide related to depression and other 
mental health problems. Studies of suicidality 
in adolescents in Viet Nam have found high 
rates of suicidal ideation. In 2012-2013, Le et 
al. (2016) surveyed 1745 students aged 16-18 
years in ten schools in Ha Noi, asking “During 
the past 12  months, did you ever seriously 
consider attempting suicide?”  Results 
demonstrated that 21.4% of girls and 7.9% 
of boys reported suicidal thinking during 
the prior 12 months. Prior year suicidal plans 
were reported by 7.8% of the girls and 4.0% 
of the boys. Students in the study reported 
exposure to multiple forms of victimization, 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
24

----- VN022 page 27 -----
including child abuse and neglect, witnessing 
family or neighbourhood violence, property 
victimization and cyber bullying with 94.3% 
having experienced at least one form of 
victimization during their lifetime and 31.1% 
having experienced ten or more forms. 
Students with ten or more victimization 
experiences demonstrated significantly 
increased symptoms of depression and 
anxiety, likelihood of health risk behaviours, 
suicidal behaviours and poorer health-related 
quality of life among both girls and boys (Le et 
al., 2015; Le et al., 2016b).  
Other research has studied prevalence of 
suicide attempts among adolescents. Thai 
(2010) studied 1,226 adolescents and found 
that 5.8% reported attempted suicide in the 
past 12 months. A joint study (2015) between 
UNICEF, Overseas Development Institute (ODI), 
and The Ministry of Labour, Invalids and Social 
Affairs (MOLISA) surveyed the rural area of Dien 
Bien, in northwest Viet Nam and documented 
333 attempted suicides, including 73 
completed suicides. Within the 333 attempts, 
140 attempts were made by children 19 years 
or younger. Within the 73 completed suicides, 
16 were children. Alarmingly, the survey 
found that suicidal tendencies are a pressing 
issue among Vietnamese youths within the 
province. The authors note that the availability 
of poisonous leaves in Dien Bien appears to 
facilitate suicide attempts particularly among 
Hmong girls, who live near to where the 
poisonous leaves grow.
3.3.3. Studies of Mental Health Risk 
Factors
One determinant of adolescent mental health 
problems is exposure to maltreatment and 
abuse.  Research indicates high rates for 
maltreatment and abuse among Vietnamese 
children. The recent Viet Nam Sustainable 
Development Goal indicators on Children 
and Women (SDGCW) survey (2020 – 2021) of 
child discipline found that 69% of children age 
10-14 experienced violent discipline within 
the previous month, and that boys were 
more likely to be violently punished than girls. 
A survey of 2,591 Vietnamese adolescents 
aged 12-18 years (Nguyen et al., 2010) found 
that 39% reported experiences of emotional 
abuse, 47% reported experiences of physical 
abuse, nearly 20% reported that they had 
experienced sexual abuse and 29% reported 
that they had experienced neglect. This study 
found higher rates of neglect and emotional 
abuse among girls, and higher rates of physical 
abuse among boys. Similarly, Akmatov (2011) 
found that more than 55% of adolescents in 
Viet Nam had experienced moderate physical 
abuse perpetrated by their parents, with 
29% of adolescents reporting severe physical 
abuse. Males experienced higher rates of 
physical abuse in this study as well. Larger 
households and poorer economic status were 
associated with higher rates of abuse.
Connection to parents and schools also impacts 
adolescent mental health. A recent survey of 
high school students in Viet Nam (Le et al., 2018) 
found poor communication between parents 
and adolescents had a negative impact on 
young people’s mental health, and contributed 
to low self-esteem, feelings of sadness and 
loneliness and suicidal thoughts. Adolescents’ 
sense of belonging and connectedness to 
their schools also play a role in their mental 
health. Data from the Survey Assessment of 
Vietnamese Youth (SAVY) I and SAVY II showed 
that adolescents who felt connected to their 
schools were less likely to report psychological 
symptoms (Phuong et al., 2013). 
Another important risk factor for Vietnamese 
adolescent mental health is caretaker mental 
health. Stratton et al (2014) studied caregivers’ 
mental distress and general health status 
(using the Self-Reporting Questionnaire-20) 
and reports of adolescent mental health 
using the parent version of the Strengths and 
Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ). Caretaker 
mental health was positively associated with 
adolescent mental health, with the association 
significant after controlling for other relevant 
demographic variables and caretaker general 
health status.
Overall, it appears that major risk factors for 
adolescent mental ill-health include female 
gender, older adolescent age, migrant 
status, poor caregiver mental health, poor 
parent-child communication, feelings of 
disconnection from school, and experiences 
of abuse, trauma and neglect. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
25
----- VN022 page 28 -----
Chapter 4  
Methodology
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
26

----- VN022 page 29 -----
A mixed-methods design was utilized 
to investigate the research questions. The 
study included literature review and primary 
quantitative and qualitative data collection. 
The mixed-methods design allowed for a 
systematic integration of data, validated 
findings from different sources of information, 
and expanded knowledge in several key 
areas. Key study questions were answered 
with integrated data. For example, to better 
understand the prevalence of common 
mental health problems among adolescent 
students in Viet Nam our research combined 
(a) literature review of previous study findings, 
(b) original quantitative data from students on 
their self-reported mental health problems, 
and (c) qualitative data regarding perceptions 
of student mental health problems from 
students, teachers, parents and school, district 
and ministry-level administrators. Integration 
of these data points provides a robust 
understanding of adolescent student mental 
health. 
An example of how the mixed-methods 
design allows for validation of study findings 
can be found in data analyses related to what 
government and school system administrators 
understand about existing mental health 
policies and MHPSS programmes. By 
comparing policies and programmes with 
understanding and perceptions of various 
stakeholders, we are able to learn about what 
policies and programmes are viable, effective 
responses to adolescent mental health 
problems, and what policies and programmes 
may need strengthening or revising in order 
to better address students’ needs. And 
final, the mixed-methods design offered 
opportunities for expanding our knowledge 
and understanding in many situations. For 
example, quantitative data regarding the 
relationship between student mental health 
problems and school climate indicators can 
suggest areas of mental health risk and inform 
recommendations. Likewise, qualitative data 
regarding stakeholder perceptions of how 
to improve student mental health yielded a 
rich trove of ideas from highly experienced 
stakeholders who understand systemic 
barriers and opportunities, and thus can offer 
feasible ideas with a high potential for positive 
impact.  
Quantitative data was collected from students 
and teachers. Students responded to a self-
report survey which included measures of 
student mental health, perceived school 
climate, academic stress, study time, academic 
performance and cyberbullying experiences. 
A teacher survey provided quantitative data 
regarding teacher perceptions of student 
mental health and well-being, teacher training 
re: student mental health, teacher capacity to 
support student mental health and well-being 
and teacher perceptions of school resources 
for students in need of mental health support. 
Qualitative methods included (1) FGDs with 
students, parents, teachers and (2) KIIs with 
principals, district-level staff from provincial 
DOET, DOH and DOLISA and Ministry-level 
experts from MOET, MOH, and MOLISA. 
4.1 Specific Aims, Activities and Research 
Methodology
Specific Aim 1: Provide an overview of 
available evidence and an analysis of i) 
the current situation of mental health 
problems of adolescence in Viet Nam, ii) 
School-Related factors affecting mental 
health issues of adolescents in Viet Nam 
and iii) the key stakeholders, policies, 
legislations, standards and programmes 
relating to mental health and well-
being among adolescents in Viet Nam. A 
literature search was conducted using relevant 
databases (EBSCO, PubMed, psycINFO, VN 
databases). Literature review included an 
overview of (a) recent epidemiological data 
regarding common mental health problems, 
(b) School-Related factors impacting mental 
health including school climate (safety, 
engagement and environmental factors), 
academic pressure and peer-related social 
stress, and (c) existing school-based MHPSS 
services and programmes in Viet Nam. Review 
of policy documents, legal documents and 
relevant standards and guidelines from 
government agencies (MOET, MOLISA, and 
MOH) was conducted to understand the 
independent and interdependent conceptual 
frameworks, roles, responsibilities and existing 
services provided by each agency in support 
of adolescent mental health in schools. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
27
----- VN022 page 30 -----
Specific Aim 2: In-depth analysis of 
key School-Related risk factors and 
their impacts on mental health and 
psychological well-being of adolescent 
boys and girls in Viet Nam including 
primary qualitative and quantitative 
data. A systems research approach was 
utilized to address this aim. Systems research is 
based on the concept that a  system  is a 
function of its parts, or components, and that 
each component interacts, interconnects, 
interrelates, and in some cases influences 
each other. To this end, people from each 
level of the school system in Viet Nam were 
invited to participate, including students, 
parents, teachers, principals, district-level 
government officials, and national ministry-
level government officials. See Primary Data 
Collection Methodological Approach section 
below for more detail.
Specific Aim 3: Map existing policies 
and schools’ strategies and actions in 
recognizing, mitigating and addressing 
mental health issues of adolescents in 
and outside school. Evidence from the 
literature review, policy document review, and 
KIIs with Ministry level (MOH, MOLISA, MOET), 
provincial and district level (DOH, DOLISA 
and DOET from 5 provinces) and principals 
of participating secondary and high schools 
informed the mapping of policies, strategies 
and services related to providing primary, 
secondary and tertiary support for adolescent 
student mental health in schools in Viet Nam. 
Specific Aim no 4: Examine the 
effectiveness of existing policies, systems 
and human resources and their limitations. 
Policies regarding school-based adolescent 
mental health support were compared to data 
collected regarding the development and 
implementation of programmes and services. 
Policies and guidelines related to inter-agency 
cooperation were compared to data collected 
regarding local school, health and social sector 
coordination in the care and treatment of 
mental health problems. Qualitative analysis of 
KII data identified themes related to perceived 
effectiveness of existing policies, services and 
systemic coordination of services.  
Specific Aim 5: Suggest recommendations 
and action plans on the role of education 
system in the provision of MHPSS and 
how the education system can mitigate 
and prevent School-Related mental 
health risks to promote positive mental 
health as well as prevent mental ill 
health. Consider different modalities for 
reaching younger and older adolescents. 
Recommendations are provided based on 
the results of the above analyses. Risk factors, 
protective factors, gaps in policy and/or MHPSS 
programme implementation will inform 
recommendations with a focus on school-
based MHPSS programmes and  system-wide 
strategies that are most likely to be effective 
for adolescents in Viet Nam. Evidenced-based 
recommendations are offered to provide 
guidance to each level of the system (Ministry, 
Provincial and School) and to each sector 
impacting on adolescent mental health, 
with a primary focus on the education sector 
and secondary focus on health and social 
service sectors. Recommendations highlight 
opportunities for improved collaboration 
across system levels and sectors. 
Specific Aim 6: Include disaggregated 
data and analysis from gender lenses, 
and considering income, geographical, 
ethnicity, sexual orientation and gender 
identity, age and disability disparities, 
whenever applicable. Data analyses by 
gender, age, socioeconomic status, and 
geographical region are included. Ethnic 
minority students are included (particularly 
from schools from Gia Lai and Dien Bien 
provinces). A small group of LGBTQ students 
were included from Ha Noi.
4.2 Primary Data Collection 
Methodological Approach
4.2.1 Collaborative Research Process
The research team worked closely with UNICEF 
and MOET Department of Political Education 
and Student Affairs to determine specific 
research activities and procedures. MOET 
was instrumental in selecting appropriate 
provinces for inclusion in the study (based 
on goals for geographical representation, 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
28

----- VN022 page 31 -----
urban/rural representation, and inclusion 
of ethnic minority communities). While the 
original proposal did not include Dong Thap, 
the province was included based on MOET 
suggestion so as to include a province from 
the Mekong Delta region. MOET also asked 
to increase the study sample size in order to 
strengthen statistical power. 
Data collection in each province was 
conducted by the senior national researcher, 
Dr. Dang Hoang Minh, and by two MA level 
psychologists with training in research and 
data collection methods. In each province, 
the research team first met with the 
provincial DOET to review study aims and 
objectives. DOET worked with the research 
team to identify participating secondary and 
high schools, schedule school-based data 
collection (surveys, Principal KIIs, and FGDs), 
and schedule KIIs with district level education, 
social and health departments. Data collection 
in each province took place over a 4-day 
period (approximately). 
4.2.2. Data Collection Methods 
Data collection took place at Ministries in 
Ha Noi and in four provinces representing 
various geographical, cultural and urban/rural 
areas of the country, including Ha Noi, Dong 
Thap, Gia Lai and Dien Bien. The initial plan 
to include HCMC had to be changed due to 
a serious COVID-19 outbreak that prevented 
data collection efforts there. We collected data 
using the following methods: (a) key informant 
interviews (KII) with high-level administrators 
from the government and school systems; (b) 
focus group discussions (FGD) with students, 
parents, and teachers; and (c) surveys to collect 
quantitative data from students and teachers. 
4.2.3. Participants 
1. Key government ministry personnel. KII 
with 1 key personnel each from MOET, MOLISA 
and MOH for a total of 3 KII with ministry-level 
government officials.
2. KII with UNICEF Child Protection Section 
Chief on relevant previous studies and key 
government documents.
3. Key government provincial and 
district-level personnel. In Dien Bien, Dong 
Thap and Gia Lai provinces, key personnel 
from DOET, DOLISA and DOH participated (2 
per agency). In Ha Noi, due to the COVID-19 
outbreak only 1 key personal each from DOET 
and DOH was able to participate (while 2 from 
DOLISA). Thus, a total of 22 KIIs with provincial 
and district-level government officials were 
included.  
4. School principals. KIIs took place with 
principals from 2 schools in each province, 
including 1 secondary school and 1 high 
school. In Ha Noi, the two schools included a 
semi-public school. This resulted in total of 7 
KIIs with school principles.
Key Informant Interview Participants
 
KIIs # Participants
Ha Noi
Principals
DOH
DOLISA
DOET
2
1
2
1
Gia Lai
Principals 
(*)
DOH
DOLISA
DOET
2
2
2
2
Dien Bien
Principals
DOH
DOLISA
DOET
2
2
2
2
Dong 
Thap
Principals
DOH
DOLISA
DOET
2
2
2
2
Ministry
MOET
MOH
MOLISA
1
1
1
Other UNICEF 1
TOTAL 34 
(*) In Gia Lai, a head teacher participated in the interview 
when one principal was unavailable. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
29
----- VN022 page 32 -----
5. Teachers. Teacher survey data was 
collected from 6 teachers/school for a total of 
66 teacher surveys (85% female, Mean age 40 
years, 61% secondary school). Teacher FGDs 
in the three provinces of Dien Bien, Gia Lai 
and Dong Thap took place April – May 2021. 
Two teacher FGDs took place in Ha Noi in 
October 2021. Each FGD included 7 teachers 
for a total of 35 secondary school and high 
school teacher participants.  See Appendix 3 
for detailed teacher demographic information.
6. Parents. Parents from Dien Bien, Gia Lai, 
and Dong Thap provinces participated in 
FGDs in April and May 2021. Seven parents 
participated in each group for a total of 21 
parent participants. A parent FGD in Ha Noi did 
not occur due to schools’ concerns regarding 
parenting stress and COVID-19 restrictions 
during the COVID-19 outbreak at that time. 
7. Students. Student participants included 
668 students (66% female, mean age 14.2 
years, 54% ethnic minority). Student FGDs in 
the three provinces of Dien Bien, Gia Lai and 
Dong Thap took place April – May 2021. Two 
student FGDs took place in Ha Noi in October 
2021. Student FGDs included 7 students 
each. An additional FGD was held for a group 
of LGBTQ-identified students in Ha Noi in 
September 2021 (4 students). A total of 39 
students participated in FGDs for the project. 
Students are included from both secondary 
schools (students ages 10-14) and high 
schools (students ages 15-19). The student 
FGDs in Gia Lai and Dien Bien consisted of 
ethnic minority students. Students from one 
semi-public school was included from Ha 
Noi to broaden the socioeconomic range of 
participants. Quantitative data was collected 
via surveys from about 60 students/school for 
a total of 668 student surveys. See Appendix 3 
for detailed student demographic information. 
4.3 Student Survey Measures
1. Student Mental Health was assessed using 
the Strengths and Difficulties’ Questionnaire 
– 25 (SDQ25) which is a brief self-report 
behavioural screening questionnaire for 
children ages 3 – 16. The adolescent self-report 
version used in the study is suitable for young 
people aged around 11-16 (Goodman et al., 
1998). The SDQ25 items ask about nonspecific 
psychological distress including symptoms of 
depression, anxiety and somatoform disorders. 
These 25 items are divided between 5 
scales: emotional problems (5 items), conduct 
problems (5 items), hyperactivity/inattention 
(5 items), peer relationship problems (5 
items) and prosocial behaviour (5 items). The 
20 items from the 4 psychological problems 
scales are added together to generate a total 
difficulties score. The SDQ25 has been widely 
used around the world and has been adapted, 
validated and widely-used in Viet Nam (e.g., 
Weiss et al., 2014).
2. School Climate was assessed using the 
Adapted Maryland Safe and Supportive 
Schools Climate Survey (MDS3) which was 
developed by the Johns Hopkins Centre for 
Youth Violence Prevention. The MDS3 for 
students is comprised of 56 core items based 
on previously validated indicators of safety, 
engagement, and the school environment 
(Bradshaw, Waasdorp, Debnam  & Johnson, 
2014). All answer choices are scored on a 
4-point Likert scale from strongly agree to 
strongly disagree, whereby higher scores 
represent a more favourable school climate. 
The 56 items assess the following areas of 
school climate:
a. Safety (perceived safety, bullying and 
aggression, general drug use)
b. Engagement  (connection to 
teachers, student connectedness, 
academic engagement, whole school 
connectedness, culture of equity, 
parent engagement)
c. School environment  (rules and 
consequences, physical comfort, 
support, disorder)
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
30

----- VN022 page 33 -----
3. Student academic stress was assessed 
using the Educational Stress Scale for 
Adolescents (ESSA) developed and validated 
with Chinese adolescents by Sun and 
colleagues (2011). The ESSA includes 16 
items rated by students on a 5-point scale 
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly 
agree) with higher scores indicating greater 
stress. The scale covers five dimensions of 
educational stress including study pressure 
(4 items), worry about grades (3 items), 
despondency (3 items), self-expectation (3 
items), and workload (3 items). The ESSA has 
demonstrated good internal consistency with 
Cronbach’s alphas of .81 for the general scales 
and a range of .66 to .75 for each dimension 
(Sun et al., 2011). Truc and colleagues (2012) 
validated the ESSA within the Vietnamese 
context. In the Vietnamese study the ESSA 
demonstrated good general scale internal 
consistency, factorial validity and concurrent 
validity, similar to the original study.  
4. Time spent studying after school. 
Students were asked “On average, how many 
extra hours per day did you spend for self-
study after school in the previous semester?” 
(Almost none, less than one hour; 1–2 hours; 
2–3 hours; and more than 3 hours). This 
measure was used in a study with a Chinese 
sample by Sun (2012) and a Vietnamese 
sample by Thai (2010). 
5. Time for private tutoring. Participants 
were asked to state their actual time (hours) 
spent for one-to-one private tutoring and 
group private tutoring. Time (hours) spent for 
private tutoring was measured by using the 
question: “How many hours per week did you 
spend for one-to-one private tutoring/group 
private tutoring after school or during the 
weekend in the previous semester?” 
6. Academic Performance. Participants were 
asked to state their actual average scores of 2 
main subjects and overall performance (Maths, 
Vietnamese, and GPA) in the previous semester. 
In Viet Nam, 10-point grading scale has been 
used throughout school system with 10 is the 
highest and 0 is the lowest (Viet Nam Ministry 
of Education and Training, 2011). Students were 
provided with response options for scores less 
than 5, 5-6.9, 7-7.9, and 8-10. 
7.  Cyberbullying was assessed using a tool 
adapted from the Revised Cyber Bullying 
Inventory (RCBI) (Topcu & Erdur-Baker, 2010) 
for use with Vietnamese adolescents (Tran, 
Nguyen, Weiss, Nguyen & Nguyen, 2018). 
The RCBI demonstrated satisfactory internal 
consistency with Cronbach’s alphas of .82 and 
.75.  
The Revised Cyber Bullying Inventory - Viet 
Nam includes 18 items regarding student 
experiences on the internet during the 
previous 6 months, including frequency 
of experiences and distress regarding the 
experiences. Higher scores on the scale reflect 
greater frequency of cybervictimization and 
greater associated stress. 
4.4 Teacher Survey
Secondary and High School teachers (N=66) 
from participating provinces completed a 
survey developed for this project assessing 
teacher perceptions of student mental health 
and well-being, teacher training experiences 
in student mental health, teacher capacity to 
support student mental health and well-being, 
and teacher perceptions of school resources 
for students in need of mental health support. 
The survey took 15-30 minutes to complete. 
4.5 Student, Parent, Teacher 
Focus Group Discussions 
FGDs explored perceptions of student mental 
health needs, experiences with School-
Related risk factors and perceptions of existing 
services and interventions. See Appendix 1 for 
FGD Guidelines and Questions. FGDs lasted 
approximately 60 minutes each and included 
the following participants: 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
31
----- VN022 page 34 -----
4.6 Principals, District and 
National Government Key 
Informant Interviews (45-60 
minutes each) explored perceptions of 
student mental health needs and School-
Related risk factors, understanding of relevant 
policies, and knowledge and understanding 
of existing MHPSS programmes.  See 
Appendix 2 for KII Guidelines and Questions.
4.7 Data analysis
Qualitative data, including all FGDs and KIIs, 
were first transcribed and then translated 
into English for analysis by the primary 
author. Preliminary review of transcripts was 
conducted to search for broad themes and 
categories. Data were inputted into Nvivo 12 
for analysis and coded according to 24 codes 
(including 32 sub-codes). These codes were 
organized into themes and sub-themes. 
Quantitative data, including student and 
teacher survey data, was analysed using 
SPSS 28. Descriptive data was analysed for 
demographic and key variable data (e.g., 
student mental health). Pearson correlations 
examined associations between key variables 
(e.g., student mental health and school 
climate variables; student mental health and 
academic pressure variables). T-tests examined 
mean differences in key variables by gender 
and educational level (e.g., academic pressure 
by gender). Analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
examined differences in key variables by 
province (e.g., 3 school climate sub-scales by 
4 provinces).
4.8 Ethical Concerns
Ethical concerns included the sensitive nature 
of qualitative and quantitative data content. 
Student surveys included information 
regarding student mental health, which may 
have negative consequences for children if 
shared. Teacher surveys included perceptions 
of school support for students with social-
emotional problems, which may displease 
supervisors at the school or at higher levels. 
Qualitative data included information shared 
about participants’ personal experiences 
with mental health problems, and concerns 
about school or system response to student 
mental health and well-being. For these 
reasons, surveys were de-identified and kept 
in a secure location. Audio recordings were 
transcribed and de-identified. Only research 
team members had access to the data. 
A second concern was that students could 
feel pressured to participate given that data 
collection occurred at school and with school 
administrator support. To mitigate this risk, 
students were informed that their participation 
was entirely voluntary and that they were free 
to withdraw participation at any time without 
repercussions. 
Another concern was for the welfare of student 
participants. While unlikely, it is possible 
that students could become upset while 
responding to the survey or when participating 
in a focus group. The data collection team 
included 2 MA level psychologists and was led 
by a PhD clinical psychologist (Dang Hoang 
Minh). The data collection team was trained 
to look out for signs of student distress and 
to offer support or referrals if needed. No 
incidents of distress were reported. 
The research protocol received ethical 
review and approval from Viet Nam National 
University’s IRB Board. IRB review included 
consent forms for students and parents. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
32

----- VN022 page 35 -----
Chapter 5 
Adolescent Student Mental 
Health and Well-Being in Viet 
Nam Study Findings
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
33
----- VN022 page 36 -----
Key Findings
1. Student self-reported mental health symptoms indicate that about 26% of adolescent students 
are at moderate- or high-risk for mental health problems. Problems with peers (including 
experiences of bullying) and emotional problems (symptoms of depression and anxiety) were 
the most common problems at 32% and 31% respectively. About 14% of students report 
symptoms of hyperactivity, including impulsivity and poor concentration, and 11% of students 
report behaviour problems, including disobedience and lying. 
2. Adolescent girls report significantly higher rates of emotional problems (symptoms of 
depression and anxiety) compared to boys. 
3. Parents often lack knowledge of common mental health problems and normal child 
development and are eager for information.
4. All principals, school administrators and Ministry-level experts (from all 3 sectors) interviewed 
expressed serious concern regarding adolescent student mental health and well-being. and 
concern for the negative impact of student mental health problems on student learning and 
socioemotional functioning. 
5. Girls are often seen as more vulnerable to psychological problems, and adult behaviour 
towards girls may serve to “protect” girls in ways that may not always support female resiliency 
and MHPS strength.
6. Teachers and administrators are concerned about ethnic minority student social isolation, 
lower rates of help-seeking and risk for suicide. 
7. LGBTQ students are concerned about their mental health and well-being. Family relationships 
and fears of stigma and discrimination are sources of stress and mental health challenges.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
34

----- VN022 page 37 -----
5.1 Student Life 
Students were enthusiastic participants and 
had much to share about their lives, mental 
health and well-being. Adolescent students 
generally attend school 6 days/week (including 
a half day on Saturday). Most students reported 
taking two or more extra classes outside of 
school each week including classes in math, 
physics, and English. When adolescents are not 
in school or in extra classes, they are engaged 
in a variety of activities including studying, 
housework, and leisure activities.
What asked what they do for relaxation, 
students often stated that they spend time 
on social media and chatting with friends via 
messaging apps. Other students share that 
they surf Facebook or “hóng tin” (follow gossip 
news for entertainment). Some students 
play sports, including badminton, football, 
basketball, yoga and swimming. A few students 
reported playing instruments, singing and 
song writing. Other students like listening to 
music, watching movies, photography and 
reading books. Students value family time as 
demonstrated by one student who expressed 
feeling “so happy” when his whole family played 
badminton together. Some students noted the 
positive impact of activities on their health 
and well-being. As a student in Ha Noi shared, 
“I don’t have a lot of time, but between classes 
there are two hours for me to take a break. I use 
that time to play with dogs and workout. Then 
I notice my body is healthier and I feel a little 
more relaxed.” 
In addition to academic responsibilities, 
students reported many responsibilities 
at home. Students help with housework, 
including “laundry, sweeping the floor, and 
clearing the table.” A few students cook dinner, 
and many students are responsible for looking 
after younger siblings. A student from Dien 
Bien reported, “[I] don’t have time to go out. My 
parents ask me to watch my sister until she is 
asleep. Because if I go out, I won’t know if she 
cries.” While many students felt the level of 
household work was reasonable, a few students 
indicated that they felt overwhelmed by these 
responsibilities. One student shared, “Being the 
eldest sister is something I find difficult since 
my parents have too many expectations and 
neglect me sometimes.” 
Students shared challenges at home including 
stress related to family conflict. Some 
students reported that parents are often 
angry, often “shout” and “swear.” One student 
described, “when my parents come home from 
work, they are tired and they take it out on me. 
They get mad if I don’t listen. They get angry 
easily.”
5.2 Student Mental Health and 
Well-being
5.2.1 Student Perceptions of their Mental 
Health and Well-Being
In discussions of mental health, students often 
identified feeling stressed or tired. When asked 
to share more about the impact of stress, 
students discussed feelings of fear, anxiety, 
frustration and sadness, mostly in regard to 
their academic performance and their future. 
They note that these feelings can impair their 
ability to study and engage with friends.
Aside from “stress,” students did not demonstrate 
much knowledge about mental health. When 
asked about depression, students in Dien Bien 
responded that it is “being scared of everything 
around,” “having too much pressure then they 
become quiet and don’t want to contact or 
talk to anyone,” “being angry whenever seeing 
someone,” and “being distant.” And students did 
not know about the nature and symptoms of 
anxiety disorders. 
Students expressed concerns about mental 
health sigma and discrimination. When asked 
how teachers, parents and other adults view 
people with mental health problems, students 
from Dien Bien said “They gossip. They said 
what was wrong with those people” and “they 
discriminate.” When asked if teachers would 
help a student who is having emotional 
problems the participants said yes, they would 
“give encouragement and comfort.”
Adolescents shared strategies that they know 
of or use to manage stress and improve their 
mental health. Students most often said that 
they would talk or text with a friend when they 
feel sad or stressed with one student noting, 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
35
----- VN022 page 38 -----
“My friends can help me to unwind the stress 
and sadness.” Some teens shared that they 
found talking with family and teachers helpful.  
Students know that they can receive different 
types of support from different people, as 
a student from Gia Lai explained, “My head 
teacher would nicely explain to me how to 
look at things in a positive light while my best 
friend would talk straightforwardly with me in a 
ruthless way to make it so negative that I would 
go do something about it.” Several students 
also stated that they look to nature to reduce 
stress, stating that they enjoy being in a garden 
or walking in the fresh air. Two students from 
Dien Bien shared that they find it helpful to 
write their feelings in a journal when they are 
stressed or upset. Other students shared that 
when they play video games, “the sadness 
disappears.” And students understood that 
physical health was important to mental health 
with one student from Dong Thap sharing, “you 
can eat good food, with many vitamins to help 
light up your spirit.” 
Quantitative data provides more information 
about adolescent student mental health and 
well-being (see Appendix 3 for full Quantitative 
Data tables and results). Findings from the 
SDQ25 assessing student mental health 
indicate that 26.1% of adolescent students 
are at moderate- or high-risk for mental 
health problems. The most common types of 
problems reported were peer problems (e.g., 
“Other children or young people pick on me 
or bully me” , “I get along better with adults 
than with people my own age”), found in 32% 
of students, and emotional problems (e.g., 
“Many worries or often seems worried” , “Often 
unhappy, downhearted, or tearful”), found in 
30.9% of students. Hyperactivity symptoms 
(e.g., “easily distracted, concentration wanders” , 
“Thinks things out before acting”) were 
reported by 14.4% of students and behaviour 
problems (e.g., “Generally obedient, usually 
does what adults request” , “Often lies or cheats”) 
were found in 11% of students. Boys and girls 
report similar rates of problems except for 
Emotional Problems (symptoms of depression 
and anxiety) where we see significantly higher 
rates of emotional problem symptoms in girls 
compared to boys. School level is also a major 
factor in adolescent student mental health with 
high school students indicating significantly 
more behaviour problems, hyperactivity, 
emotional and total problems compared to 
students in secondary schools. 
5.2.2. Teacher Perceptions of Student 
Mental Health and Well-Being
Teachers generally agreed that most students 
are generally healthy and happy. As a teacher 
from Ha Noi reported, “Most of the time, 
teachers see students in their prime energy 
with optimistic outlooks... I think the schooling 
environment has encouraged students to feel 
comfortable and joyful.”
However, teachers did express a number of 
concerns about student mental health. As 
one teacher from Dong Thap stated, “I think 
that about 85% of students seem to be happy. 
However, about 10% or 15% get stuck in the 
opposite circumstance. They always wear face 
masks for any occasion, as if they were suffering 
from depression. They are also unable to 
concentrate on listening to what we teach them 
in class. They often look around the classroom 
and stay quiet instead of talking or hanging 
out with friends, and when we come closer to 
talk to them they are startled.” A teacher in Ha 
Noi agrees with the concern for “introverted” 
students who rarely speak or show emotion. 
Other teachers shared concern for students 
who lack confidence and engagement in class. 
Teachers identified underlying student deficits 
that they believe lead to mental health 
problems. A teacher in Ha Noi voiced concern 
for students’ ability to solve problems and see 
that this deficiency leads to increased stress, 
“students nowadays are not very keen or skilful 
in finding solutions to overcome or amend 
their limitations.” Another teacher agreed that 
students often lack problem solving abilities 
and intrinsic motivation for learning and 
believes that these problems lead to stress and 
mental health problems which interfere with 
learning. 
Teachers sometimes shared confusion 
regarding the nature of student problems. A 
teacher from Dong Thap shared an example 
of a student who was talking to himself at 
home and disengaging from school and social 
interactions. She was concerned and suspected 
the problem was depression. She did not 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
36

----- VN022 page 39 -----
refer the student to a hospital but gave more 
attention to the student at school. 
Quantitative teacher data from 66 teachers 
provides more insight into teacher perceptions 
of adolescent student mental health and well-
being. Survey results indicate that almost all 
teachers are concerned about their students’ 
stress and well-being (91%) with 53% of teachers 
reporting they are “Very concerned.” Similarly, 
almost all teachers are concerned about their 
students’ mental health (95%) with 54% of 
teachers reporting they are “Very concerned.” 
Most teachers (34 teachers) estimate that 10% 
or fewer of their students experienced stress 
problems in the past month, although 15 
teachers estimated higher rates of between 
10-20% of students having stress problems in 
the past month. Teachers also report low rates 
of mental health problems among students, 
with most teachers (50 teachers) estimating 
10% or fewer students having mental health 
problems in the past month. The most 
common adolescent student mental health 
problems reported by teachers include Poor 
Attention, Lack of Confidence, Low-energy/
Tired and Anxiety. Moderately common 
problems reported by teachers included 
Anger/Aggression, Sadness/Depression, and 
Disruptive Behaviour. Teachers indicated that 
the least common problems were Oppositional 
or Defiant Behaviour, Alcohol/Substance Abuse, 
and Serious Peer Conflicts. 
5.2.3. Parent Perceptions of Student 
Mental Health and Well-Being
In general, most parents reported satisfaction 
with their children’s well-being finding them 
often happy and well-behaved. When parents 
were asked about student mental health 
concerns, parents often initially spoke of 
issues related to puberty, sexual/romantic 
relationships, phone use, and child displeasure 
regarding studying. Many parents were 
concerned about child irritability, anger or 
defiance at home. Parents expressed concern 
about children being disrespectful. As one 
parent from Dong Thap shared, “There is this 
outburst quality, compared to when I was 
at the same age, there are [more] outbursts 
and disagreement. In general, I find him quite 
unruly.” Several parents believe that disrespect 
towards parents is a modern problem and are 
concerned that it reflects changing values. As 
one parent noted, “Kids these days are easily 
angered [compared to] us back when we 
were that age. For example, back then, we 
would have stayed silent and ignore when 
parents yelled at us, but now only one or two 
sentences and the kids talk back.” Parents also 
report lacking confidence in how to respond to 
children’s disrespect and anger. 
Initially, parents did not often think of common 
mental health symptoms such as loss of energy, 
lack of interest, worries, etc. When parents 
in Dien Bien were asked if their secondary 
school children experienced stress they initially 
thought no. However, when the facilitator 
described signs and symptoms of stress, parents 
then reported that their children did experience 
stress. These patterns of responses indicate that 
parents lack understanding regarding common 
mental health problems and related symptoms.
Parents expressed confusion regarding normal 
adolescent development and were not sure 
when behaviours indicated a problem. Gia Lai 
parents reported problems such as irritability, 
distractibility and tiredness. and wondered if 
these behaviours could be due to puberty. A 
parent from Dien Bien asked the facilitator what 
to do about adolescent disrespect towards 
parents. Parents from each province reported 
signs of anxiety and depression but were 
unsure how best to support their children or 
how to seek information or support.
5.2.4. Key Informant Perceptions of 
Student Mental Health and Well-Being
All principals interviewed expressed concern 
regarding adolescent student mental health 
and well-being. Discussion of common mental 
health problems in students included stress, 
anxiety and depression but there was also some 
discussion of behaviours considered immoral. 
For example, a principal from Gia Lai reported 
student smoking, having inappropriate 
relationships that lead to conflict, and spending 
time on phones or the internet. Another 
principal was concerned about student lack of 
motivation. She and the school faculty struggle 
with how to motivate students and find that 
family intervention does not help much. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
37
----- VN022 page 40 -----
Some principals shared concerns regarding 
skill deficits that they believe underlie student 
mental health and functioning problems. A 
principal from Dien Bien reported that students 
often lack necessary problem-solving skills 
and stated, “If students are not equipped with 
problem-solution skills, they will certainly be 
faced with situations where they cannot deal 
with issues in friendships and relationships with 
teachers.”
Principals also shared a concern for the negative 
impact of student mental health problems 
on student learning and socioemotional 
functioning. As a high school principal from 
Ha Noi reported, “[mental health problems] 
reduce their ability to learn, their ability to focus 
and deal with situations. They wouldn’t be 
interested in any subjects or any career options 
in the future.” Another principal described a 
cycle of mental health problems and poor 
performance, “students become irritable, quick-
tempered, and over-reactive. [When they face] 
things are light and casual, now they feel like 
they are being stung, been called out, been 
criticized. Then they don’t focus, their results 
get lower, and this gets repeated over and 
over. They completely lose the confidence that 
they had before and their previous ability is no 
longer there.”
Principals reported that mental health problems 
are often misunderstood and misidentified 
at school. A principal from Ha Noi shared an 
example of an 8 th grade student with severe 
sleeping problems who withdrew from school. 
In this example, the school and parents missed 
signs of an emerging mental illness so did not 
seek professional help. The child developed a 
serious mental illness, was later hospitalized, 
and never returned to school. 
All DOET administrators interviewed share these 
concerns about adolescent student mental 
health. An administrator from Ha Noi expressed 
the importance of supporting adolescent 
student mental health, “I think mental health 
should be deemed more important and 
indisputably vital for a student’s growth, which 
can even be ranked at higher importance than 
academic achievement. I think it is better to 
teach students how to control themselves 
before throwing them math knowledge such 
as sin, cos, tan, cotan.”
DOH administrators also viewed adolescent 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
38

----- VN022 page 41 -----
mental health as a serious issue. Experts shared 
that depression and anxiety were problems 
among students. A participant from Dong Thap 
stated, “There are stresses that the kids keep 
inside and don’t talk about because they see so 
many expectations from the school and from 
their parents, while they themselves can’t fulfil 
these expectations. Occasionally this leads to 
a state of hiding, withdrawal from everything 
so they end up not communicating.” Health 
officials often discussed the impact of mental 
health problems on adolescent development. 
An DOH official from Dien Bien remarked, 
“The matter of psychological-mental health in 
adolescence is really crucial since this period 
has a huge impact upon the educational goals 
of adolescents. Mental health decides whether 
the kids will be distracted by something or 
whether they gain the direction they need in 
order to succeed in life. Once the adolescents 
are psychologically stable, can they be directed 
in the right career path. If the kids are left with 
no guidance to control the psychological 
distractions, their lives can go astray.”
Likewise, DOLISA administrators expressed 
concerns regarding adolescent student mental 
health. A Ha Noi DOLISA expert sees that 
adolescents lack ability to solve problems and to 
develop relationships and finds that these skill 
deficits put students at risk, “The first problem 
is that children are quite weak in the ability of 
solving problems in their lives, and their ability 
to connect with their surroundings. I think their 
relationships and social connections, and their 
help-seeking, are not good and not enough 
people are paying attention. [These problems] 
explain why there are suicide cases that surprise 
parents and the child’s  friends, since many of 
them feel that the child was just stressed.” 
Experts from MOH, MOET and MOLISA 
agree that adolescent student mental health 
represents a serious challenge for society. 
An expert from MOH reported an increase in 
mental health problems over the last 10-20 
years due to “economic-social development, 
industrialization, modernity, information 
technology development, and changes in 
living standards. These changes put pressure 
on the younger generation which often leads 
to problems. ” This expert also noted that 
mental health problems may seem more 
prevalent now due to increased awareness of 
these problems. He stated, “In the past, there 
might have been a few cases [of adolescent 
mental illness] but people didn’t care so they 
didn’t recognize the problem. Now people’s 
knowledge is expanding, and they are more 
likely to identify those cases.” 
5.3 Data and perceptions 
regarding how student mental 
health needs vary by gender, 
ethnicity, and LGBTQ status.
Beliefs about gender differences related to 
adolescent mental health were sometimes 
expressed in the FGDs and KIIs. In general, 
parents and administrators shared perceptions 
of girls as more vulnerable to mental health 
problems. One parent in Dien Bien expressed 
a belief that girls are not as healthy as boys 
stating, “I have a girl and you know girls do 
not have as much health as others, which 
is why examinations always put make me 
worry. Moreover, I do help my daughter with 
everything, things that she may not be able 
to do all the time, such as helping her with 
housework so the rest of the time can be spent 
on studying only. This is due to my daughter’s 
health condition. Otherwise, she may show 
signs of insomnia which has to be supported 
by medication.” Another parent from Gia Lai 
expressed a belief that boys were less effected 
by mental health problems, speculating that it 
was because “boys are usually bolder.”
The mental health and well-being of ethnic 
minority students was a concern for a number 
of participants. Of particular concern was 
ethnic minority student social isolation, lack 
of help-seeking and risk for suicide. A DOET 
administrator in Dien Bien noted that ethnic 
minority students in his school district are 
vulnerable to mental health problems, “The 
Mong students only consider hanging about 
with students from the same ethnicity and 
so they end up rarely playing with or getting 
acquainted with the Thai people. Therefore, the 
issues remain in a particular ethnic group, which 
is why it is so difficult to sort out everything. 
Students rarely take the initiative to share their 
concerns and would rather take the events 
in their hands alone. And many times, the 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
39
----- VN022 page 42 -----
way they deal with these events is drastically 
negative in nature. For example, in case of 
romantic love issues, a girl or a boy could have 
conflicts in the relationship and decide to self-
isolate and not share the story with anyone. 
This can lead to suicidal ideation and death. The 
students have a natural resource of (poisonous) 
heartbreak grass, which can serve the idea of 
suicide pretty easily. To conclude, the difficult 
thing about getting to know a student’s mental 
health lies in the students themselves, who 
do not have skills for sharing about difficult 
personal issues in order to get help untangle 
their minds.” An administrator at DOH in Dien 
Bien also expressed concern about suicide 
among Mong adolescents via “heartbreak 
grass” poisoning. Family reluctance to seek 
help for children’s problems was also noted as 
a concern regarding ethnic minority students. 
A DOLISA administrator from Dien Bien noted 
that ethnic minority communities are less likely 
to access health care when their children are 
sick leading to incidences of serious illness 
(including mismanaged epilepsy) among 
adolescent students at times.
LGBTQ students report concerns with their 
own mental health and well-being. While 
the study included only a small group of 
LGBTQ students, results indicate a need for 
concern and further research. Students shared 
feelings of anxiety regarding relationships and 
school performance, negative self-image and 
insecurity, and emotional instability. Students 
reported feeling overwhelmed by negative 
emotions at times. For example, one student 
shared, “I mostly go to the more negative 
direction when I’m so stressed, and I don’t know 
how to let it out, there’s no way that I can forget, 
so after that I do some self-harming. Before, I 
used to use knives. Then after that, I didn’t want 
to cut my own body so I threw anything sharps 
in the house away and then I started to switch 
to other methods - such as banging my head 
against the wall or pouring boiling water on my 
hands.” While this student reported that s/he 
had received some psychological counselling 
they did not find it helpful as they perceived the 
counsellor to be judgmental and not empathic.      
Family relationships can be a significant source 
of LGBTQ adolescent stress. Students reported 
anxiety regarding coming out to their parents. 
Several students shared that parental negative 
reactions to their sexual orientation and gender 
identity have been a source of sadness and pain. 
As one student expressed, “For me the most 
stressful [relationship] is the relationship with 
my family. Actually, I have been independent 
from my family pretty early. Since secondary 
school when I chose to be far away from my 
family until now, I haven’t talked much to my 
mother, my father or my siblings. When I came 
out, my father and my family cut off all support 
for me, including financial support for my 
studying. They kind of accept it but still haven’t 
supported me as a gay person.” Students whose 
parents ultimately support and accept them as 
LGBTQ shared that this is a source of resiliency. 
As one student shared about coming out to 
his/her mother, “My mother, being very tense 
and serious, clasped her hands and bowed to 
me and she prayed for me to live like a normal 
person. That day I was very hurt but after a 
while, my mother showed that she was very 
supportive, she told me that she won’t care 
who I love as long as I’m happy. So I’m very 
lucky to have a supportive mother.”
While coming out can be a stressful process 
for adolescents, some adolescents find it 
ultimately positive. One student shared, 
“Personally, I feel that coming out officially as 
a LGBT person was kind of liberating. I’ve been 
hiding it for a long time. I don’t need to be afraid 
of how my parents will get hurt, but I feel more 
comfortable like I feel more confident. People 
used to tease me with names like ‘manly chick’ 
and such and it made me uncomfortable. But 
when I share about how I am, people respect 
it. Plus, when I come out, I have found more 
friends in the community the same as me, and 
I see there are a lot of talented people in the 
LGBT community.” 
LGBTQ students shared a variety of feelings 
regarding the future. Some students reported 
feeling positive and excited about the future. 
As one student shared, “in general, I am also 
quite positive towards the future because 
I go to the school I like, with my friends who 
love me, to study a major that I like and feel 
confident  about.” However, another student 
expressed pessimism about the future, stating 
“I don’t know what to do, the future is pretty 
bleak.” 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
40

----- VN022 page 43 -----
Chapter 6 
School-Related Factors 
Impacting Student  
Mental Health and  
Well-being in Viet Nam
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
41
----- VN022 page 44 -----
Key Findings
1. A significant number of adolescent students report low school engagement and connection 
with teachers. Students do not often feel comfortable going to teachers for academic or 
socioemotional support. 
2. Principles, administers and ministry experts expressed concerns regarding teacher-student 
relationships. Key barriers to improving teacher-student relationships include teachers’ lack of 
time and administrative support. 
3. Student survey data demonstrates that students who feel less engaged in school (e.g., less 
connected to teachers) have higher rates of mental health problems. Importantly, girls report 
feeling less engaged in school compared to boys. 
4. Bullying is a serious risk factor for student mental health problems and well-being. Teachers do 
not always recognize the negative impact of bullying on students.
5. Almost all participants expressed critical concern regarding student experiences of academic 
pressure and the impact of that pressure on student mental health, well-being, and learning. 
Workload, pressure from teachers and parents, and systemic factors underlie high levels of 
student academic pressure.
6. Parental lack of mental health knowledge is a risk factor for student mental health problems.
7. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on student mental health and well-being. 
All participants expressed concerns regarding the impact of social restrictions and isolation 
on student psychosocial development and the impact of online education on student mental 
health and learning. 
8. Ethnic minority students are at increased risk for problems with mental health and well-
being. Family poverty, with related pressure on students to work (during school hours), marry 
young and remain in the community, is a specific risk factor for ethnic minority students. 
Lack of family-school connection and poor mental health literacy among the ethnic minority 
community are additional risk factors. 
9. LGBTQ students are at increased risk for mental health problems and face specific challenges, 
including stigma, discrimination, bullying and family relationship stressors. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
42

----- VN022 page 45 -----
Student and teacher perceptions of school 
climate, including the school environment, 
student engagement and school safety, 
suggested several important risk-factors for 
adolescent mental health problems. See 
Appendix 3 for quantitative data tables and 
results.
6.1. School Environment
Young people generally reported that they 
were happy with their schools. School 
environment was important to students, 
with many students independently bringing 
up positive or negative traits regarding the 
environment. Many students commented on 
the “nice facilities” of their school. While one 
student reported to like his school because 
of the “green and tidy environment,” other 
students expressed dissatisfaction regarding 
noise levels and general disorder. One student 
stated, “I don’t like students who make noises 
in class and come to other classes and prevent 
others from studying, even though there 
are school rules for them to follow but they 
remain the same.” The noise, disorder and lack 
of consistent implementation of rules have 
a negative impact on student satisfaction at 
school. 
Quantitative student survey data indicated that 
less satisfaction with the school environment is 
significantly related to higher rates of student 
mental health problems. No differences 
between boys and girls emerged regarding 
perceptions of school environment. Students 
in Ha Noi were the most satisfied with their 
school environment compared with students 
from other providences.
6.2 School Engagement and 
Teacher Support 
School engagement includes factors such 
as student connection to teachers, student 
connectedness, academic engagement, whole 
school connectedness, culture of equity, and 
parent engagement.
While some students shared that they felt 
supported by teachers, the majority of students 
reported feeling disconnected from teachers. 
Some of the concerns focused on a lack of 
learning support. In Ha Noi, students felt that 
teachers often only quickly reviewed basic 
material before focusing on advanced content. 
Students in the group discussed how they 
often don’t understand the basics and then 
have to struggle to review that content on their 
own using the internet. When asked if they can 
share with their teachers about needing more 
support they expressed worry about how they 
would be perceived by teachers. 
When asked about going to teachers for 
support with socioemotional problems, 
students expressed a number of reservations. 
They do not always feel connected to teachers. 
As one student shared, “Between me and 
the teacher, it is a very long distance.” There 
was also a concern that teachers would not 
understand their problems and would just say 
“Yeah, stay strong.” Another student shared a 
concern that they would be perceived as weak 
by teachers stating, “I think the teachers would 
think this problem is comical because they 
don’t understand why normal things make me 
feel pressured.” And students shared concerns 
about their teachers’ time, “Teachers are pretty 
busy, so we don’t want to bother them with our 
little private matters.”
Principal, district-level administrators, and 
ministry-level experts often shared concerns 
regarding student school engagement 
and relationships with teachers. One DOH 
administrator from Ha Noi described two 
schools with very different school climate, 
“In one high school, teachers are more open. 
Students can talk to teachers like their friends. 
When they talk to teachers, they are open and 
free to speak out their opinions. On the other 
hand, when we worked with [the other] school 
students were excited and talked openly until 
teachers came in. When teachers came in, they 
were quiet. They didn’t talk and teachers had 
to ask questions and call out a name to answer 
those questions. They were too shy to express 
their opinions. So…I think that teachers and 
parents have an impact in students’ mental 
health.” 
Several administrators shared concerns that 
teachers lack time and support for developing 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
43
----- VN022 page 46 -----
relationships with students. As one administrator 
from Ha Noi DOLISA stated, “When I think back 
to our time, teachers could know each student’s 
family situation very well. But now, if I were to 
talk about the homeroom teachers, I think 
that would be too big of a requirement for the 
teachers because the pressure of teaching is 
so great.” Other administrators shared that this 
problem is compounded by large class sizes 
that make it difficult for teachers to get to know 
each student. 
Student survey data provided evidence that 
students who feel less engaged in school (i.e., 
less connected to teachers, to other students, 
less whole-school connection) have higher 
rates of mental health problems. Importantly, 
girls reported feeling less engaged in school 
compared to boys. Students in secondary 
school report higher levels of school 
engagement compared to students in high 
school. Students from Dien Bien reported the 
least school engagement, while students from 
Dong Thap were the most engaged.
6.3 Peer Relationships and 
Bullying
Students generally reported feeling safe 
and having good friendships at school. They 
acknowledged that arguments and problems 
can happen among friends, but shared 
strategies for managing those problems 
including apologizing and taking time to 
cool down before “making peace.” Students 
spoke about the importance of friendships 
and shared difficulties navigating problems 
with friendships. One student said, “We are 
kind of in the ongoing period of psychological 
development, so even a small problem or 
a misunderstanding between friends can 
cause a break in the friendship. So, every time 
the friendship breaks it’s a very difficult thing 
to overcome. Sometimes tears can appear, 
especially when we believe in friendship.” When 
peer conflicts occur, they have a negative 
impact on student’s experience at school. As 
a student in Ha Noi shared, “There are some 
friends who are constantly having conflicts 
with each other. It makes the class lose its unity 
and makes us who do not participate in that it, 
makes us more stressful.”
Teachers agreed with students that peer 
relationships are an important factor for student 
well-being. Like students, teachers shared that 
some students have peer conflicts that leads 
them to disengage from other relationships 
and from school, and to feel isolated and 
despondent. 
Students and teachers agreed that physical 
fights among students rarely occur at school. 
While students appear to generally feel 
physically safe at school, students may not 
always feel emotionally safe. Students shared 
many examples of bullying among peers. One 
student stated that a classmate was “boycotted 
and abandoned by everyone in the class” for 
several months. After a period of time a teacher 
advised students to be kind and inclusive 
towards the targeted student. This informal 
support from the teacher was appreciated by 
the student participant. But she reported that 
(a) many students do not feel comfortable 
sharing with their teachers about social or 
emotional difficulties and (b) no other school 
support was provided to address the bullying 
or to support the victim. Students from many 
schools also reported this type of “boycott 
bullying.” A student in Ha Noi shared a personal 
experience, “When I was in 6th grade, I was 
bad-mouthed behind my back by everyone. 
They talked bad about me like… they thought 
that my mother gave my teacher a gift and that 
was why the teacher favoured me. They said 
bad things about me... that my parents bribed. 
Honestly, I felt very hurt.” 
Student survey results indicated that student 
perceptions of school as less safe were 
significantly associated with higher rates of 
mental health problems. Data also showed 
higher rates of bullying in secondary school 
compared to high school. Students in Ha Noi 
reported higher perceptions of school safety 
compared to students in the other three 
providences. Students in Gia Lai reported 
significantly less school safety compared to 
students in the other providences.
Teachers disagreed amongst each other on 
the frequency and impact of bullying. Some 
teachers reported that there is very little bullying 
at school, while others saw it as a frequent 
occurrence. A teacher in Ha Noi shared a story 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
44

----- VN022 page 47 -----
of peer conflict in a class involving bullying. She 
believed that teachers and parents successfully 
intervened to resolve the problem. She 
reported that such experiences were normal 
in childhood, and that children often learn and 
grow from these experiences, “The time when 
the children were apart, they were not close, 
and talked badly about each other. That is very 
normal for children. Then later it will become 
very useful lessons for them. They must learn 
how to live in the group, must know how to 
accept other people’s differences.”
Students were particularly upset about bullying 
that focused on how a student looks. They said 
that students are often teased for being “fat” 
or “short” with girls most often targeted. One 
student described the experience, “Like teasing 
you until you get frustrated. To the point where 
you are crying. Then feeling helpless. You feel like 
you can’t do anything about it.” They reported 
that while both boys and girls tease girls this 
way, it is mostly boys who do this type of teasing. 
When asked why they think boys tease girls this 
way, they thought the boys enjoyed hurting the 
girls’ feelings, stating, “Like, they laugh out loud 
when they see someone sad. They laugh over 
the sadness of other people.”
Cyberbullying is also a serious problem for 
students. All the students reported use of the 
internet and social media and many students 
reported observing both friends and strangers 
being bullied online. Student survey data 
explored the issue of cyberbullying with the 
item, “Have you ever been cyberbullied?” Most 
students (47.3%) report that they have never 
been cyberbullied. About 30% of students 
have only “rarely” been cyberbullied, 20.2% 
report “sometimes,” and 2.1% have “often” 
been cyberbullied. No significant gender 
differences or providence differences were 
detected. Cyberbullying frequency and 
associated distress differed significantly by 
school level. High schoolers are significantly 
more likely to experience cyberbullying and 
report significantly more distress related 
to cyberbullying compared to students in 
secondary schools.
Principals and education administrators shared 
concerns about cyberbullying. A principal in 
Ha Noi described that students, “call out each 
other, beat each other or insult each other or 
gang up on each other online. An “online gang-
up” is when our students gather online together 
to smear, to insult, to aim at only one person. 
And all of that affects the psychology of both 
the person being attacked and the ones who 
actively attack.”
6.4 School pressure
6.4.1 Academic Pressure
Students all reported experiences of academic 
pressure and the FGDs explored the nature 
and impact of the academic pressure. A few 
students believed that the pressure was helpful 
in motivating them to study with one student 
saying, “I think without the stress accompanied 
by studying, I wouldn’t have had the attention 
needed to focus on studying for the highest 
score.” However, most students described 
being overwhelmed by the pressure and 
stress and believed that the pressure has a 
negative impact on their health and academic 
performance. Students expressed high level 
of stress related to workload, pressure from 
teachers and parents, exams and extra classes. 
Most teachers who participated in the FGDs 
expressed concern regarding the amount of 
academic pressure students experience, and 
the impact of that pressure on their mental 
health and well-being. Teachers report sources 
of academic pressure including workload, 
pressure from competitions and exams, 
teachers, parents and student self-expectations. 
Teachers noted age differences in causes of 
school-based stress. They reported that younger 
aged students have anxiety related to adjusting 
to new a school environment which includes 
more classes and work, and to trying to make 
new friends. Older students experience pressure 
related to making important life decisions and 
preparation for taking specialized exams. As 
one teacher said, “Their choice here is crucial in 
order for them to have the best turning point 
later in life, which can be very stressful.” 
Gender is a significant factor in students’ 
reported academic pressure. Survey results 
indicate that girls experience significantly 
higher levels of academic pressure including 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
45
----- VN022 page 48 -----
pressure to study, worries about grades, self-
expectations, and despondency regarding 
academics. This is in spite of similar perceptions 
of academic workload among boys and girls. 
School level also impacts experiences of 
academic pressure. Findings suggest that 
high school students report significantly more 
academic pressure compared to secondary 
school students. The academic stress comes 
from pressure to study, self-expectations, 
workload, and their experience of greater 
despondency. Students from different 
provinces show significant differences in 
academic pressure experiences. Adolescents 
report higher levels of academic pressure in Gia 
Lai and Ha Noi compared to Dong Thap and 
Dien Bien provinces.
6.4.2. Workload and Academic Pressure
One cause of academic stress is the workload 
required to obtain good grades. Almost all 
students, from both rural and urban areas, agree 
that the workload is too heavy. As one student 
from Ha Noi jokingly shared, “I have a law called 
the ‘Law of Endless Schoolwork.’” She explains, “I 
cannot have much entertainment. I have extra 
classes, then every Saturday morning I have to 
do the homework of the week. Sunday I also 
have extra classes.” 
The high workload is reflected in student 
survey responses regarding time spend 
studying outside of school. Results indicate 
that over 50% of students are studying more 
than 2 hours after school each day, with 28% 
of students reporting more than 3 hours of 
study each night. Students are also spending 
a significant amount of time in private tutoring 
or extra classes each week. While about 50% of 
students report 2 or fewer hours of extra classes 
or tutoring per week, the other 50% of students 
report more than 3 hours per week, including 
15% of students spending more than 9 hours a 
week in extra classes/tutoring. 
Teachers share students’ concerns regarding 
the heavy workload and the consequent lack 
of time for other activities. Many teachers 
felt that the high student workload prevents 
them from learning important skills. A teacher 
in Dong Thap shared, “Nowadays students’ life 
skills and soft skills are not as good as ours. 
They can’t swim in the river as well as us. I 
don’t know if this metaphor makes sense, but 
it is a fact that students nowadays are just like 
industrial chickens. We make them study all 
the time and that’s all they know. They have no 
ideas of other things. [This other teacher] cares 
about her child and her child can play piano, 
communicate with peers, and play sports to 
improve her physical health, which is a very 
good thing. I think that parents and teachers, 
like us, should also give children some time and 
space to do something else besides studying.”
6.4.3. Academic Pressure from Teachers
Many students expressed anxiety regarding 
teacher reactions to students’ poor 
performance. When students do not perform 
well, they reported that teachers are “unhappy,” 
may “shout,” and “make comparisons.” Students 
seemed especially distressed when teachers 
compared them to other students who 
performed better, stating this this felt “unfair” and 
made them feel “sad.”  One student explained 
their reaction to this by saying, “teachers often 
ask difficult questions belonging to the gifted 
classes, and when you can’t answer that, it leads 
to comparison with other classes and resulting 
in students feeling hatred towards that teacher, 
and when their class comes, no student 
wants to raise their hands.” Teachers’ negative 
reactions to student performance can decrease 
student engagement and academic success. As 
one student stated, “When we are stressed, we 
don’t feel good, or feel anxious when you have 
to recite the lesson to the teacher since you 
are scared of having bad answer and making 
teacher unhappy.” 
6.4.4. Academic Pressure from Parents
Students also discussed the stress of parental 
academic pressure. Many students reported 
that parents pressure them succeed and 
have high standards that reportedly stress 
the students to “study 24/24.” As one student 
described, “My parents don’t force me, but a 
lot of the time my parents have expectations. 
So often when I have low scores my parents 
don’t scold me but I feel I have let them down. 
Those things make me stressed out.” Another 
student stated, “I usually get stressed due to 
scores since my parents want me to achieve 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
46

----- VN022 page 49 -----
Two Schools, Two Approaches to Learning:   
A Comparison of School Models and Student  
Well-Being
Teachers from two schools in Ha Noi shared views 
indicating different perceptions and approaches 
to academic pressure and workload. Teachers 
at one school expressed concern regarding 
academic pressure sharing, “Teachers are really 
concerned with students’ mental health since they 
understand that students cannot study well while 
feeling stressed and I especially don’t want them 
to feel pressured.” Teachers reported giving minimal 
homework that allowed students to review and 
explore class topics but did not overwhelm them 
with work. They described thinking creatively about 
homework. For example, a Chemistry teacher spoke 
about “assignments dealing with experiments 
that encourage them to follow the evidence and 
observe real life phenomena” that students could 
share with the class via videos. Still, teachers at 
this school expressed concern for the amount of 
studying students do, and wondered if it could 
ultimately have a negative impact on learning. As 
one teacher stated, “I remember studying much 
less than students do now and I played most of 
the time actually. I felt like balancing my time 
between study and entertainment surely made me 
absorb the knowledge better and more efficiently. 
However, when I look at students nowadays, many 
kids are seen studying all the time, from dawn till 
dusk.” Teachers in this school believed the structure, 
curriculum and teaching approach at their school 
reduced student stress. Students are in small classes 
that are not organized by merit or rank so there is less 
competition among students. The school nurtures 
their strengths and encourages them to study and 
major in subjects that they are good at. The school 
offers clubs and activities to help students cultivate 
interests and skills, including leadership, teamwork, 
and organization.
This approach to academic pressure and workload 
is different from the approach of another Ha Noi 
school. Teachers in the focus group from this school 
do not see academic pressure or stress as a problem. 
Teachers at this school believe that only a small 
number of students are significantly impacted by 
stress. As one teacher stated, “When that situation 
does happen, their teacher, family and friends will 
help them quickly to avoid the situation and help 
them quickly return to their jolly, normal state.” 
Teachers here do not see that stress impacts learning 
very much. As one teacher described, “In regard of 
learning ability, [stress] will have little effect, tiny 
effect, and mostly unmentionable, and the students 
will overcome it quickly and not get affected much.” 
Teachers are aware of the large workload placed on 
students at this school and see this as necessary for 
students in a competitive school. As one teacher 
states, “About my school, it is one of the top schools 
of the city, and of course, if they want to excel in 
school then certainly the intensity and quantity 
of work will definitely have to be more than other 
schools. The time spend for studying is a lot, almost 
all week, even Saturday and Sunday they still have to 
stay at home. They rarely go out and on weekends 
they use the time to attend extra classes.”
Teachers here see that some children struggle, but 
do not necessarily identify that this can be caused by 
stress or mental health problems, or that the stress 
and failure can lead to worsening mental health. For 
example, one teacher reported, “From what I see, for 
example in the Excellent Student Contest, they are 
very stressed, worried, feel pressure about this exam, 
worried about the percentage of students who win 
this. The knowledge they must learn is huge, but 
they are extremely determined. Those who have the 
strong determination and great effort, they turn the 
stress into motivation to overcome that stage in a 
very excellent and spectacular way. But others who 
have weaker personal competence, their self-control 
is poor. Sometimes after even small failures then 
they suddenly fail. With good support and good 
determination, if they are closely supported, they 
will overcome this problem well and the destination 
will be very fruitful. But if [they get] a little neglected, 
for example, if the parents neglect them and they 
themselves are not resilient enough, they will slip 
and fall harder. Then it will be difficult for them to 
get back on track.”
The contrast between these two schools 
demonstrates two very different approaches to 
school curriculum, teacher-student relationships, 
and educational objectives. It is clear that the 
school culture of the first school places student-
teacher relationships and student well-being at 
the center of the school curriculum. This approach 
is likely to provide greater socioemotional support 
for more students, thereby enabling more students 
to positively engage and succeed in school and 
beyond. Educational administrators and leaders 
may consider these, and other, models as they work 
to meet educational and vocational goals. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
47
----- VN022 page 50 -----
a certain score and getting an Excellent title.” 
A student in Ha Noi said, “I don’t have much 
time to take a break, because I’m really weak 
in math right now, so after finishing school my 
dad always makes me go do math.” All four 8th 
grade students in the Dien Bien student group 
reported feeling pressure from their families 
regarding their future plans. The students 
shared that they “dream about becoming 
something, and then trying” but perceive that 
their parents are not interested in their dreams. 
Parents, from their perspective, “lead us to do 
what they want” and the children must “study 
to become what parents want.” They shared 
that parents want them to “work-in-an-office 
kind of jobs” in “places that we can easily get 
into because parents have connections there.” 
Unfortunately, the students agreed that these 
tend to be “places that we don’t like.”
6.4.5. Systemic Causes of Academic 
Pressure
Administrators and experts from education, 
social and health sectors discussed underlying 
systemic causes of academic pressure. Almost 
all key informants expressed concern regarding 
the impact of academic pressure on adolescent 
mental health and well-being. An expert from 
DOLISA in Ha Noi noted that academic pressure 
comes from parents, teachers and students and 
noted that the educational curriculum does not 
teach children how to solve problems, including 
how to cope with school stress. The underlying 
systemic problems were described as an 
“achievement illness” within the school system. 
An expert from MOH agreed and expressed 
concern regarding the school curriculum. 
This expert believes that the curriculum is too 
focused on intensive exam prep at a young age 
and student competitions. When describing 
how the competitions impact student 
workload, pressure and quality of education, 
he stated, “It’s obviously a credit-driven system. 
It brings good reputation for schools and puts 
pressure on students.” 
Teachers and administrators explored 
underlying causes of teacher pressure. DOET 
administrators noted that the system for teacher 
performance evaluation leads to increased 
academic pressure on students. Teacher 
performance is based on student achievement 
and the system includes competition between 
teachers for teacher rewards and promotions. 
As one DOET expert noted, “Just imagine the 
scenario where teachers are required to possess 
high achieving students in order to level up 
class ranks and then some classes get ranked 
lower just because some students were not 
able to make it and then somebody judges you 
and your performance. It is hard indeed.” Higher 
rates of school enrolment contribute to this 
problem as more students mean it is harder for 
students and teachers to achieve top ranking 
placing both students and teachers under 
increased pressure. A DOET administrator 
from Ha Noi agreed and shared her previous 
experience as a teacher stating, “I was mainly 
concerned with student achievement and 
I had to resort to discipline in order to push 
students no matter what it takes so that they 
can finish assignments on time. Little did I care 
about their emotions and all that I cared for in 
the short term is assignment completion.” She 
believes this teacher mentality continues to this 
day and strongly contributes to the academic 
pressure put on students. 
6.4.6. Impact of Academic Pressure: Mental 
Health and Well-Being
Students provided a great deal of evidence 
regarding the negative impact of academic 
pressure, including stress and other mental 
health problems, poor concentration and 
memory, lack of sleep, and social problems. Of 
primary concern is the relationship between 
academic pressure and student mental health. 
Correlational analyses from the student survey 
data indicate a highly significant, moderate-
to-strong relationship between student 
experiences of academic pressure and student 
reported mental health. Study pressure, 
worry about grades, despondency related to 
academics, self-expectations, and workload 
were all significantly related to all mental health 
problems. There is a strong relationship between 
total academic pressure and total mental health 
difficulties. As correlational analyses cannot 
prove the direction of the relationship, it may 
be that (a) academic pressure may influence 
student mental health, (b) student mental 
health may influence student experiences of 
academic pressure, (c) they both may influence 
each other or (d) something else may influence 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
48

----- VN022 page 51 -----
both academic pressure and student mental 
health.
Students in Ha Noi report high levels of 
academic pressure and shared many examples 
of the negative impact of academic pressure 
on their mental health and well-being. One 
student shared, “When we are so stressed, we 
don’t have time to exercise or walk or relax. 
Even if it weren’t for the epidemic, we wouldn’t 
be able to go anywhere comfortably. Because 
now wherever I go I have to think about my 
homework. I think about it all the time – school, 
homework, and stuff. When there is too much 
work and I can’t do it in time or something is 
lacking, it’s pretty scary. I have a fear of being 
scolded by teachers or parents. When I’m 
stressed, I can’t sleep peacefully. For example, if 
it’s before the exam, when I study the subject of 
literature, when I sleep my head is still thinking 
about literature. I can’t sleep.” Other students 
note that they study so much that their mind 
often wanders and then she isn’t able to 
concentrate. She can sit for many hours and still 
not get work done. 
Teachers shared a number of examples of 
academic pressure leading to poor mental 
health and functioning problems. Teachers 
in Dong Thap spoke about the link between 
academic pressure and mental health, and 
believed academic expectations should be 
tailored to individual student’s ability in order to 
engage them in school successfully. A teacher 
in Ha Noi shared, “Last year I had a student who 
specialized in Chemistry. At first, they had high 
hope for the Excellent Student Contest but due 
to the heavy pressure they put on themselves 
during the revise phase, it backfired, and they 
got too stressed out. They were heavily stressed 
and couldn’t overcome it. It took parents 
and teachers a lot time and effort before the 
entrance exam to high school to help them to 
find out where they want to go.”
There is widespread concern among 
administrators and experts regarding the impact 
of academic pressure on student mental health 
and well-being. An administrator from Ha Noi 
DOLISA expressed concern about burden of 
academic pressure and workload stating, “The 
children are under too much pressure so they 
worry, they are stressed, they can’t eat, and they 
can’t sleep. That’s why a lot of students - I know 
there are a lot of them – a lot of students after 
the exams are very  depressed. It’s really not 
worth it for the children, I think.” An expert from 
MOET agreed with this concern and shared a 
personal experience of a friend’s child who 
was a good student but when it came time 
for the university entrance exam she struggled 
to study, “At that time she was feeling a down 
and had low self-esteem. And after that, she 
withdrew and didn’t interact with anyone. 
If [parents and teachers] had discussed her 
difficulties and helped her on another path she 
could have found a different direction. Now 
this person is a mental patient who is being 
treated for a long time at the hospital. If she 
had received timely intervention, at that stage, 
I think she would have been a different person, 
not a mental patient like now.”
Experts were concerned about the high levels 
of academic pressure placed on students 
in competitive schools. An expert from Ha 
Noi DOET shared that students at a local 
competitive school are “blacklisted” if they 
don’t finish all their homework, meaning that 
those students are reported to the school 
and parents. He asked, “Don’t you think that 
is a bit too much pressure? It would be fine if 
students were able to manage all that but in 
real life even outstanding students had their 
unsatisfactory moments and failures. That leads 
to disappointment and negative thinking. They 
end up losing motivation and being pessimistic. 
They hate things and avoid things.”
Students also shared how academic pressure 
and related stress negatively impact their 
learning and academic performance. Students 
discussed how they sometimes study very 
hard only to find they have no memory of the 
information when it comes time for the exam. 
High school students report higher levels 
of academic stress. Many students reported 
staying up until 2 or 3:00am nights before an 
exam. Students reported that the stress of 
studying for exams made them feel “restless” 
and “tired” . One student reflected, “I find it hard 
sometimes since studying for exams gives me 
restlessness despite my effort to study all there 
is and be prepared but somehow I still feel 
restless and later sleepy in the morning.” 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
49
----- VN022 page 52 -----
Many students reported that they do not get 
enough sleep. One student shared, “Normally, 
I sleep between 2 am and 4 am, or 1 am to 5 
am. So, in class I can’t concentrate. I’m too tired 
to write. It’s getting worse. I actually feel like I 
cannot keep up with things.” He stated that 
he is noticing difficulty concentrating in class 
and remembering things. A secondary student 
from Dong Thap noted “When I’m stressed, I’m 
usually tired and I don’t want to talk much with 
other people, which makes other friends in the 
class poke at me and I don’t like that.”
6.4.7. Impact of Academic Pressure: 
Student Learning
Along with concern for student mental health, 
participants expressed concern that academic 
pressure had a negative impact on student 
learning. A DOLISA administrator from Gia 
Lai finds that schools now only care about 
academic achievement, which has a negative 
impact on students’ intrinsic interest in subjects 
and passion for learning. She stated, “Some 
schools now are achievement-oriented with 
many teachers putting pressure on students. 
[Students] study as they should but are not 
really conscious or invested in their study. 
Students these days I found many of them to 
be not as good as the generation before.”
A number of participants expressed concern 
about the impact of lack of sleep on student 
learning. A principal in Ha Noi expressed 
concern about the link between lack of sleep 
and poor emotion regulation and learning. 
She stated, “The biggest problem of students 
is not having enough sleep. And at this age, 
when [they] do not get enough sleep, it will 
lead to sluggishness. They are almost always 
in a state of sluggishness and drowsiness. They 
are unfocused. And when this state lasts for a 
long time, it leads to very negative reactions. 
They become easily angry, quick tempered, 
and even less focused on learning. And when 
they are not concentrating, their school results 
are not high.”
6.5. Family-related Factors
6.5.1. Family Risk Factors for Poor Mental 
Health and Well-Being
Key informants expressed concern regarding 
other risk factors for poor student mental 
health, including family factors. Family-based 
risk factors include family economic stress, 
parental neglect, family conflict, and lack of 
parenting skills. 
Participants observed that family economic 
problems place students at risk for 
socioemotional problems. Administrators and 
experts noted that financial stress in families can 
cause children anxiety and impact their school 
performance. Family poverty can also result in 
student low self-esteem. A DOET administrator 
from Dien Bien stated, “you can see how 
students who want to integrate into social life 
are stopped by the lack of financial support. For 
example, if they want something that would 
take some money to buy it ultimately pushes 
them to shy away more. They try to recoil into 
themselves.” 
Several principals and administrators 
identified parental neglect as a potential risk 
for adolescent mental health problems. They 
expressed concern that parents often had 
to prioritize work or business over spending 
time with their adolescent children. One DOET 
administrator noted that parents are often 
focused on business and other things, and 
do not always consider it important to listen 
and empathize with their children. A DOLISA 
administrator agreed and shared, “The most 
important thing is still the time that the parents 
spending with the child. Parents don’t have time 
to spend with their children, so they just give 
out a  phone for them. That is a root cause of 
the children’s mental health being affected.”  
The DOET administrator believes more research 
on parental risk factors is needed, along with 
training for parents on their children’s mental 
health and well-being needs. 
6.5.2. Parental Mental Health Knowledge 
and Support
Teachers and administrators from several 
provinces noted the importance of parental 
engagement in terms of supporting students 
with mental health concerns. As one teacher in 
Ha Noi stated “I find that even for the students 
who do not have any major mental health 
problems, the coordination and concern of 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
50

----- VN022 page 53 -----
the parents for the child’s psychology is the 
most important thing. If the parents care, as 
soon as there is a very small sign of change in 
the psychology of the child, early intervention 
will be effective immediately. But if the family 
doesn’t understand the problem then it 
becomes a big problem.”
Many participants were concerned about 
parents lacking knowledge and skills regarding 
adolescent mental health and well-being. A 
participant from Ha Noi DOLISA expressed 
concern for parent mental health knowledge 
stating, “The problem is parents lack skills to be 
able to accompany the child, to discover their 
problems, to spend time with  the child.  The 
pressures in life and  the problem of making 
money is a problem, but also  in very rich 
families there is not much time for children. 
[Parents need] to understand why the child is 
having  psychological changes in order to 
be able to understand and help them. To do all 
that, the parents must have knowledge.” 
6.6. Technology-Related Risk 
Factors
Many participants expressed concern regarding 
the amount of time that students were spending 
using technology, including time spent surfing 
the internet, gaming and social media. Concerns 
exist regarding both the impact of adolescent 
exposure to negative or unhealthy content and 
the impact of the amount of time spent using 
technology rather than engaging in real world 
interactions with peers and family. A DOET 
administrator remarked that adolescent mental 
health problems are “intensified by the impact 
of technological advancement, the dark side 
of devices such as smartphones, video games 
or social media. All of these things can severely 
affect the mental health of students.”
6.7. COVID-19, Mental Health and 
Well-Being
All stakeholders expressed concern regarding 
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on 
student mental health and well-being. Concerns 
included the impact of social restrictions and 
isolation on student psychosocial development 
and the impact of online education on student 
mental health. Students reported concerns 
about social isolation during COVID-19. A 
student in Ha Noi shared, “When staying at 
home, the number of people I communicate 
with is more limited, because there aren’t many 
people the same age as me there. It’s like my 
feelings are not being best understood.”
Teachers and school administrators were also 
concerned about the pandemic’s impact on 
students. Concerns included social isolation, 
lack of access to normal healthy developmental 
activities, and the impact of the pandemic on 
the exam schedule and resulting student stress. 
A teacher from Ha Noi reported, “Studying 
online means in many cases you are at home 
most of the time, which prevents you from 
going out much and therefore causing more 
stress, which is worsened by the increasing 
loads of work due to COVID impact.” Likewise, 
a principal in Ha Noi expressed concern about 
the impact of the pandemic on socioemotional 
development and learning. The principal 
reported that children who enjoy sports and 
arts are suffering more as they don’t have those 
outlets and opportunities to achieve and be 
recognized by peers and adults for their talents. 
S/he is concerned that many students are losing 
confidence in themselves during this time.
There is specific concern for senior students 
as they prepare for university exam and 
admissions. An expert at MOET shared, “due to 
the influence of the epidemic, senior students 
are very worried when taking the high school 
graduation exam or the exit exam, because 
the epidemic situation have severely affected 
them. There must be timely intervention. For 
example, policies to solve those problems 
quickly like reducing the workload or facilitating 
conditions for them to take the final exam so 
that they can go to universities or colleges. 
Without these [interventions], it will lead to 
stress or psychological trauma.”
6.8. Ethnic Minority Student Risk 
Factors for Mental Health and 
Well-Being Problems
Many participants were concerned about 
school-based risk factors for ethnic minority 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
51
----- VN022 page 54 -----
student mental health problems. Family 
socioeconomic factors are recognized to 
be key risk factors for poor mental health. In 
Gia Lai, an administrator notes that parental 
divorce and domestic violence negatively 
affect students’ well-being. S/he also notes that 
ethnic minority students are often pressured to 
marry in adolescence and to stay home to take 
care of their parents. This administrator notes 
that even highly successful ethnic minority 
students become hopeless about the future 
as they are pressured to marry and stay in their 
village where job opportunities at home are 
scare. “They see with their own eyes that after 
education, there is no job opportunities. [They 
could go to] university and master’s degree, but 
when they go home they stay at home.” Ethnic 
minority student schooling is also impacted 
by a number of events, including seasonal 
farming duties and funerals. Administrators in 
Gia Lai expressed concern that frequent school 
absences decrease student engagement and 
put students at risk for drop-out. 
An administrator from Gia Lai DOET reports that 
ethnic minority student mental health barriers 
include language barriers for many students 
and families. However, an administrator in Dien 
Bien finds a lack of socioemotional skills to be 
more fundamental, “Once they have reached 
the 5th, 6th grade, their Vietnamese language 
will be quite OK. The problem remaining is 
the skill barrier; soft skills in terms of conduct, 
problem solving, and communication skills not 
being adequate.”
One issue expressed by teachers and school 
administrators, is the difficulty engaging 
ethnic minority parents in concerns about 
mental health. As an administrator at Dien Bien 
DOET explained, “[One concern] is the parents 
are mostly from minority communities and 
therefore unable to understand this issue. That 
is the case we have and we can see how the 
mental health problems of ethnic minorities or 
people in rural areas has been lacking attention.” 
These concerns emphasize the importance of 
building effective family-school partnerships 
and increasing caregiver mental health literacy. 
Parents of ethnic minority students did not 
share concerns regarding school climate, 
academic pressure or adolescent mental health. 
They did report that exam periods are a time of 
high stress for children, but found that children 
generally led a balanced life otherwise. Parents 
of ethnic minority children enrolled in the Gia 
Lai boarding school reported intense “round 
the clock” studying with little time for activities 
and play. In found this schedule satisfactory and 
were pleased with the school and it’s “military 
style” structure. 
Another concern regarding ethnic minority 
student risk factors is their geographical 
isolation. The DOET administrator from Dien 
Bien explained, “[For the] minority groups, the 
most notable issue we can see is isolation. 
Whenever a student studies far away from 
home, it is harder for them to adapt and you 
can see the more they try to adapt, the more 
they grow increasingly shyer, and unconfident.” 
6.9 LGBTQ Student Risk Factors 
for Mental Health Problems
LGBTQ students report varying experiences 
with school environments and related risk-
factors. In general, LGBTQ students share 
common stressors as non-LGBTQ students 
in that they are concerned about heavy 
workload, upcoming exams and other 
sources of academic stress. In addition, LGBTQ 
students shared sources of stress regarding 
discrimination and bullying regarding their 
LGBTQ status.  A couple of students in the FGD 
attended schools that were highly supportive 
of LGBTQ students. These students were very 
positive about their schools, with one student 
sharing, “Because I study at [school], everybody 
has a very open view about LGBT-related issues, 
and lecturers care a lot about LGBT students. 
Most students at the school are not judgmental 
about our gender identities. They talk to us 
like normal people.”  Students in supportive 
school environments shared examples of 
teachers caring about students and taking 
the time to support them emotionally. Other 
students reported experiencing discrimination 
at school. One student felt disrespected and 
misunderstood when a teacher spoke to the 
class about LGBTQ being a “trend.” 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
52

----- VN022 page 55 -----
Chapter 7:  
School-Based Adolescent 
Student MHPSS Policies and 
Programmes in Viet Nam
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
53
----- VN022 page 56 -----
Key Findings
1. Starting in 2005 MOET has established several policies in support of student mental health. These policies 
direct the development of school counselling programmes, provision of inclusive education for children with 
disabilities, address the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on student mental health and well-being, 
and, most recently, promote student mental health awareness and mental health skills via a comprehensive 
School Health Programme (2021-2025). 
2. Adolescent students believe there is a need for school-based mental health support, including professional 
counselling and general mental health promotion activities. They are reluctant to seek help from teacher 
counsellors due to concerns about confidentiality and discomfort related to sharing personal information 
with a teacher.
3. Teachers, administrators, and experts identified current challenges to providing mental health support for 
adolescent students at school. 
a. School counselling programmes are usually staffed by teachers with limited training and limited time for 
counselling support. 
b. Schools often lack a dedicated, private space for student counselling. 
c. Stakeholders identify strong, supportive teacher-student relationships as essential for early identification 
and support for student mental health problems. However, teachers, principals, and administrators see 
many barriers to supportive teacher-student relationships including large class sizes, lack of attention to 
the issue within teacher training programs, and lack of prioritization within the educational curriculum. 
d. The secondary and high school curriculum is focused on rigorous and competitive academic classes. 
Students have few opportunities for life skills, arts, and sports.
4. Related to teachers’ ability to support student mental health and well-being is their ability to effectively 
motivate students and manage classroom misbehaviour. In the past corporal punishment was used to 
motivate and discipline students. Teachers may still believe in physical discipline or may not know of other 
strategies for motivating students and managing student misbehaviour. 
5. Most principals and DOET administrators recommend the creation of a specific position for a professional 
school counsellor.
6. Many participants suggested the need for a comprehensive approach to supporting adolescent student 
mental health and well-being, including professional counsellors, mental health literacy programs for 
students, teachers, and parents, systems for screening and assessment of students, improving teacher-
student relationships, and offering life skills and well-being classes for students.  
7. There are many barriers to obtaining professional treatment for students with severe mental health problems, 
including a lack of community resources and the impact of stigma on parents’ attitudes towards help-seeking. 
8. Ethnic minority adolescent students have specific mental health and well-being needs that are not yet fully 
met within schools. These students often experience poverty, discrimination and marginalization related to 
high risk for school drop-out and poor mental health. School counsellors face challenges communicating 
with and engaging ethnic minority families. 
9. LGBTQ students express a need for professional counselling services at school and would like to see 
comprehensive sex education school programmes include LBGTQ knowledge to reduce stigma and 
discrimination towards LGBTQ students. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
54

----- VN022 page 57 -----
7.1 MOET Policies
In 2005 MOET issued Official Letter No. 
9971/BGDDT-HSSV Implementing School 
Counselling for General Students and Higher 
Educational Students. This offered guidance 
for the development of school counselling and 
prompted the initial development of training 
in school counselling. Public schools in major 
urban cities launched school counselling 
programmes. However, programme 
development was developed on an individual 
school basis without research evaluating 
programme efficacy and without standards 
for programme development. Furthermore, 
the number of schools to develop such school 
counselling programmes was limited. 
In 2017, MOET issued Circular No. 31/2017/
TT-BGDDT, a legal document establishing 
school counselling in all public schools in Viet 
Nam. This policy outlines a school counselling 
programme that functions to support students’ 
mental well-being with a focus on student 
age, gender, marriage, family, adolescent 
pregnancy, morale, wellness, relationships, 
learning skills and career development. The 
policy also states that experienced teachers 
with school counselling skills can take the role 
of school counsellor and provide mental health 
counselling to their students, in addition to 
their main teaching duties. Teachers taking on 
the role of school counsellor must be provided 
with relevant professional development by the 
DOET, Schools of Education and psychological 
experts. Moreover, Circular 31 sets policy 
guidelines for the establishment of school 
counselling facilities in every school in Viet Nam.
Related MOET policies address education 
for students with disabilities. Decision 338 
from January 2018 issues the comprehensive 
Education Plan for People with Disabilities 
for the 2018 - 2020 time period to advance 
inclusive education goals. Decision 1438  
followed in October 2018 and issued goals for 
the 2020-2025 time period to further advance 
protection, care and education of children with 
disabilities nationwide. While these policies may 
provide for children with severe mental illness, 
they focus primarily on physical disabilities and 
would not be relevant to most children with 
mental health problems.  
Directive No. 31/CT-TTg of the Prime Minister 
dated December 4, 2019 establishes policies 
for strengthening ethics and lifestyle education 
for pupils and students. While not directly 
related to mental health, the development 
of lifestyle education may include aspects of 
mental health life skills education which offers 
important universal mental health problem 
prevention strategies.
MOET policy has also supported the mental 
health of students impacted by the COVID-19 
pandemic. Directive No. 800/CT-BGDDT, 
dated August 24, 2021, of the Minister 
of Education and Training directed the 
implementation of tasks for the school year 
2021-2022. This policy directs the Education 
sector to carefully attend to student mental 
health and well-being in consideration of 
the impact of the pandemic, and to develop 
support for students in need. Further 
consideration of student mental health and 
well-being needs was addressed in Dispatch 
No. 136/CD-BGDDT dated February 8, 2022 
regarding support for students when they were 
to return to school after a long period of online 
learning due to the pandemic.  
An important policy regarding cross-sector 
collaboration for support of student mental 
health and well-being is Decision No. 4969/
QD-BGDDT dated December 30, 2021. This 
policy issues a plan for developing social work 
in the education sector during the period of 
2021-2025.
A comprehensive School Health Programme 
for the 2021-2025 period was developed 
by The Ministry of Education and Training 
(submitted to the Prime Minister Decision 
No. 1660/QD-TTg dated October 2, 2021). 
The content of the programme focuses on the 
care, protection and management of students’ 
health, including assessment of risk factors for 
mental health, strengthening communication 
and health education, improving students’ 
knowledge about mental health, and 
providing developmentally appropriate 
counselling on psychophysiology and mental 
health in schools. Decision No. 4659/QD-
BGDDT dated December 14, 2021 of the 
Minister Education and Training issued a plan 
to implement Decision No. 1660/QD-TTg  
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
55
----- VN022 page 58 -----
dated October 2, 2021 of the Prime Minister 
promulgating the School Health Programme 
for the period of 2021-2025. The Prime Minister 
approved the School Health Programme for the 
2021-2025 period in Decision No. 85/QD-TTg 
dated January 17, 2022. One important aspect 
of this Programme is a plan to link school health 
programmes with community health care 
services in order to improve the quality and 
effectiveness of student health care activities. 
A MOET expert shared that this Programme 
will promote mental health awareness among 
students and teaching students strategies for 
improving mental health and well-being.  As 
the MOET expert noted, “After this intervention 
programme, the problem will receive 
widespread attention. [The students] will be 
consulted more regarding mental health. I 
think when this programme is issued, the issue 
of mental health will be promoted more.”
7.2  Perceptions of School-Based 
MHPSS Services and Programmes 
(availability and effectiveness)
7.2.1 Student Perceptions
Students discussed how their schools support 
adolescent mental health. Students often 
shared about informal teacher support  
provided at school. A student from Gia Lai 
reported, “My teachers would, for example, 
give us advice if we were to do something 
not appropriate and encourage us into better 
performance to alleviate the sadness. The 
school would help the students reconcile with 
classmates for amiable friendships and help us 
alleviate the stress so I can interact with others 
more freely.” 
Students also discussed counselling services 
provided by their schools. Students in Dong 
Thap were aware of a school counselling team 
comprised of teachers and administrators 
at their school. However, the students had 
difficulty remembering which teachers were on 
the team. As one student put it, the team is “not 
quite in memory as I have only heard about it 
briefly.” When students in Dien Bien were asked 
if their school had any resources they said “Yes. 
Miss [name of the teacher] and another teacher. 
She told us to talk to her if anything happened. 
But no one did.” They reported that they thought 
that students would meet the teachers in 
person if needed but did not know anyone who 
had met with the counsellor teachers. Students 
in Ha Noi were not all in agreement about 
the school counselling services. While some 
students did not know about a counselling 
room and service, two students were confident 
that a room existed and that a Civic Education 
teacher provided counselling services. When 
asked if they might use the counselling room 
in the future if they needed support, students 
generally agreed that they likely would not. 
Reasons included fears that what they share 
would be shared with others and because it 
would be “embarrassing.”
7.2.2. Teacher Perceptions
Teachers in Dong Thap describe a counselling 
service involving head teachers and the 
principal offering weekly counselling meetings. 
These teachers also recognized that teacher-
student relationships are key, and that teachers 
must know each child and tailor instruction to 
the strengths and needs of each child.
Teachers in a semi-public school in Ha 
Noi reported that their schools have a 
psychological counselling room staffed by a 
teacher with some counselling training. They 
shared that students use the counselling 
services and believe the counselling teacher 
and school are dedicated to supporting 
students psychologically. They understand the 
counselling is confidential and believe that all 
students are aware of the room and counselling 
service. One teacher reported, “This year, the 
school will hire a full-time staff who specializes 
in mental health work, rather than part-time. I 
think hopefully it will be more effective.” Beyond 
the counselling room, teachers did not identify 
other formal programmes for student mental 
health support stating, “There hasn’t been any 
typical programme specialized in supporting 
student’s mental health problems. Most of 
the time, school administration only functions 
through one consultant room represented by 
the Department.”
Teacher quantitative data regarding school 
resources and programmes for student mental 
health and well-being finds that 81% of 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
56

----- VN022 page 59 -----
teachers report knowledge of policies and/or 
basic programmes for student mental health, 
including school counselling facilities and 
the school nurse.  When asked about details 
of programmes, some teachers shared about 
scholarship programmes for poor students, 
and about sexual reproductive health and 
social skills education. When asked if existing 
resources and programmes were adequate for 
supporting students, 58% of teachers said they 
were not. See details in Appendix 3. 
7.2.3. Principals, Administrators and 
Ministry Experts’ Perceptions
Principal interviews made it clear that 
programmes and services are provided 
inconsistently across the country. A principal 
in Gia Lai was unfamiliar with MOET policies 
regarding student mental health. When asked 
about support or programmes for students 
with socioemotional needs, s/he shared about 
the extracurricular programmes and activities 
offered at the school 
A principal of a school in Ha Noi believes her 
school provides effective socioemotional 
support for students. This principal reports on 
the school counselling room and service, but 
focuses on how school class structure and 
curriculum support students by prioritizing 
teacher-student relationships and a supportive 
school culture. Homeroom teachers have 
two periods with students each day so they 
have stronger relationships with students 
and are able to observe students closely and 
recognize signs of problems early. The school 
is also able to have smaller class sizes which 
allow for improved teacher relationships and 
observations of emerging difficulties. As this 
school is an experimental school, the principal 
acknowledges that the school is able to adopt 
this approach while other schools are not. 
Another Ha Noi principal identified three 
components to the school’s approach to 
supporting the mental health and well-being 
of adolescent students including a counselling 
room and service, teacher relationships with 
students and families which allows them 
to provide informal counselling support for 
struggling students, and changes to the 
curriculum that are designed to provide 
more psychological support for students. The 
principal describes, “First, every school in the 
city has a counselling department. The second 
thing is the support from teachers, who are 
close to students and their family. Teachers 
have counselling skills. They are not specialized 
in counselling, but they have experience. The 
fact that they give advice and talk to students 
and parents is an effective way of support. 
The curriculum system from 2018 has been 
changing related to tests and evaluation. 
There are improvements in the curriculum 
that support students better psychologically. 
There are activities that support students 
psychologically and [improve] their skills.”
DOET administrators agreed that a fundamental 
aspect of school-based student support is the 
relationships between teachers and students. 
Students must have trusted teachers whom 
they can go to if they are in need of support.
An expert from MOET expressed confidence 
in current mental health and well-being 
programmes, and in the mental health 
support available to adolescent students. 
The expert shared that there already are 
many programmes including “counselling 
on health and on physiology, in addition to 
training regarding students’ learning. On the 
subject of organizing and adding activities 
to support mental health for students, there 
are very successful ones related to clubs, for 
example sports-related clubs or health clubs 
or extracurricular activities or face-to-face 
conversations. Life skills education can also help 
children first develop their talents and interests, 
secondly let them balance between learning 
and entertainment, so that children can have 
a comfortable learning spirit which means 
they are both physically and psychologically 
comfortable so that they can study effectively 
in the best way.” The MOET expert reported that 
schools have counselling rooms, counsellors, 
coordination with parents and teachers for 
“timely support of students” , extra-curricular 
activities such as life skills education lessons. 
They also noted that some schools are able to 
work closely with the medical unit for student 
mental health screening so that they can offer 
timely counselling for students. The expert 
shared a goal of expanding screening capacity 
around the country. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
57
----- VN022 page 60 -----
7.3 Teacher and School Leader-
ship Perceptions of School and 
Teacher Capacity to Provide Stu-
dent Psychosocial Support
Teachers expressed concern and sensitivity for 
students in need of psychosocial support. They 
shared examples of situations when they were 
confused about how to best support students. 
For example, a teacher in Dong Thap was unsure 
of how to help a struggling student, “In my class, 
there was a student that acted as if she suffered 
from autism. That student hardly ever spoke 
in complete sentences, and sometimes when 
she looked at a math problem or a paragraph 
on the board in class, she understood it but 
always spelled and wrote it down incorrectly. 
Sometimes I stood next to her and told her to 
rewrite the sentences, and she made the same 
mistakes again. When I contacted her parents 
for cooperation, they said that she was just like 
that at home.” The teacher’s confusion regarding 
the nature of the student’s difficulties and how 
best to support her reflect a lack of capacity.  
Other teachers reported lacking skills  
for motivating students. One teacher shared 
about how teachers used to be able to spank 
students to motivate them and now that is not 
permitted. This teacher reported difficulties 
finding new ways of motivating students and 
managing the classroom.  
School counselling rooms are most often 
staffed by a teacher who has received some 
basic training in student counselling. The 
teacher who provides that service at a school in 
Ha Noi was in the FGD and shared a bit about 
her experience. She reported that she has many 
students coming for support, often regarding 
life problems and difficulties communicating 
with others. She connects with students in 
person, over email or via messaging apps. She 
expresses that her role is often to listen and 
share and give guidance, and to be available 
for students when needed and over a long 
period of time. She believes it is this caring 
and supportive relationship between her 
and students that allows them to overcome 
challenges and emotional difficulties. Beyond 
this counselling service, teachers in this group 
agreed that there was no specialized mental 
health programmes for students at the school. 
A primary barrier to effective counselling service 
at schools concerns the issue of teacher-
counsellors’ time. Teachers at a school in Ha 
Noi noted the limitations of the counselling 
services provided; “I think the consulting 
service at my school has existed for 1 to 2 
years. Students have been given basic mental 
support but the time for counselling tasks 
has been quite limited due to the counselling 
teacher having to teach in many classes.” 
Administrators also expressed concern 
regarding teacher capacity to provide mental 
health support. A DOET administrator from Gia 
Lai described problems with teachers’ attempts 
to provide informal support, including 
difficulties accurately identifying students 
in need, and inconsistently engaging family. 
This expert also found problems associated 
with the current counselling service provided, 
including that the counselling programme is 
not properly and consistently staffed due to 
teachers being assigned counselling duties 
when they have a gap in their schedule. This 
results in inconsistencies in the counselling 
team which undermines student trust and 
relationships with counsellors. Another key 
problem identified is that the teachers assigned 
to counselling do not receive proper training to 
take on the role. The Gia Lai DOET administrator 
noted that funding is an underlying problem 
since schools are not provided funding for 
training. 
DOET administrators shared concerns regarding 
teacher training and the curriculum lacking 
support for students’ mental health and well-
being. As one administrator from Ha Noi 
shared, “I have studied teaching methodology 
class in college the most they teach us is how 
to teach lessons so that students understand 
and not so much to do with caring for students 
unfortunately. The class goes into teaching 
various steps including first stage- class 
greeting, step 2-lesson review, 3- teaching 
new lessons and then the last step is testing 
and assessment and then one more task is 
concluding the lessons then greeting. That 
is pretty much it. That is what happens in 
classes and what us teachers do actually.” She 
also shared concerns about teacher training 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
58

----- VN022 page 61 -----
in classroom management strategies, stating 
that, “People still have the impression that if you 
spare the rod, you spoil the child. Yet it is indeed 
more humane to think that with love and 
compassion comes better results and overall 
more positive outlooks.” 
A MOET expert shared barriers to school-based 
mental health including a lack of facilities 
(including private counselling rooms) and the 
lack of adequately trained human resources for 
counselling. The expert noted, “If school staff  
are providing counselling in schools, question 
is “whether these “kiêm nhiệm” teachers (“kiêm 
nhiệm” is the employee in charge of many areas 
at the same time) are adequately trained or not. 
If these teachers don’t have adequate training 
or counselling abilities as well as mental health 
knowledge, this will be a limitation.”
Teacher quantitative data indicate that most 
teachers feel confident in their basic knowledge 
about student mental health, although a 
sizeable group (about 36%) believe they do not 
have enough information about mental health. 
Teachers also largely agree that identifying 
and supporting students with mental health 
problems is part of their role. 
When asked about training in adolescent 
student mental health, most teachers (86.4%) 
report that they have received no training. See 
detailed survey results in Appendix 3. 
7.4 Student, Teacher and School 
Leadership Perceptions of School-
Based MHPSS Needs
7.4.1 Student perceptions of school-based 
MHPSS needs
When asked about what else they would want 
from the school to support their well-being, 
students stated that they would very much 
like to have someone designated to talk to at 
school about their problems and would like 
a private space to talk about sensitive topics. 
Students recognized a need for psychological 
evaluation at school. One student in Gia Lai 
shared, “I know a friend in my class who kept 
sitting alone at breaktime, so I decided to go 
talking with that friend to cheer her up. I think 
the school administration should examine her 
psychologically.” Other students considered 
how the school could facilitate discussions 
on mental health and well-being topics. One 
student suggested that “the head teacher in 
the class could organize a period in which there 
would be a total session spent on having an 
intimate conversation between members of the 
class and teacher once a month.” And a student 
from Gia Lai suggested, “I think the school should 
add more events such as the programme ‘Teens 
Speak’ to help students give out their intimate 
moments in front of teachers and friends.”
One issue of concern for teens is teachers’ 
reaction to student relationships and sexuality. 
One student from Gia Lai shared, “I think the 
teachers should not have too much problem 
with the love story development between 
students as many students consider romantic 
love as something normal as long as you don’t 
go over the line in any way. Meanwhile, my 
teachers always condemn romantic love as 
something really forbidden and evil as they 
want students to live abiding by the rules in the 
mindset of students being innocent as they are 
and not wanting them to go astray.”
Students noted that having organized 
celebrations on a regular basis at school 
would help reduce their stress and improve 
moral. Students in Dien Bien would like for 
teachers to “organize playing activities like 
sports, propaganda activities, students sharing 
opinions… things like that.” Students in Ha 
Noi also like activities organized by the school 
and find that activity days reduced their stress. 
Students were concerned about vulnerable 
peers and one student suggested, “I think I 
would love to see the school organize more 
entertaining activities on holidays as well as 
launch a movement on holidays such as Tet 
Holiday in which students in difficulty could 
have a gift endowment to encourage them 
living a normal life like others.” 
Students also wish schools would reduce the 
academic pressure put on students and see this 
as an important issue in reducing their stress. 
Students in Ha Noi suggested that the school 
could assign fewer academic exercises to 
reduce the workload and that teachers should 
not scold students. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
59
----- VN022 page 62 -----
7.4.2. Teacher, Principal, Administrator 
Perceptions of School-Based MHPSS 
Needs
Teacher quantitative survey results  
include teacher perceptions of major barriers 
to providing more services for children with 
mental health needs at school. Teachers 
identified several major barriers, including lack 
of human resources (like counsellors), lack of 
interest / concern from parents, lack of training 
opportunities for school staff, and lack of policy 
to guide services. See Appendix 3 for detailed 
results. 
School faculty and leadership identified ways 
to improve MHPSS at schools. Most principals 
and DOET administrators, including those from 
Gia Lai and Dien Bien, recommend the creation 
of a specific position for a professional school 
counsellor. School administrators from every 
province expressed concern regarding teacher 
and medical staff motivation and capacity to 
take on counsellor roles. Concerns included a 
lack of teacher time due to teaching demands 
and poor motivation given that they prefer to 
teach within their specialty rather than take on 
a new role. One DOET participant stated that 
teacher counsellor training has been poor due 
to lack of training opportunities. When training 
opportunities are offered, they are often of a 
poor quality with information shared but no 
opportunities to actively learn and practice 
counselling techniques. Additionally, models of 
training a few staff who are then charged with 
training additional staff are ineffective.  
A principal from a semi-public school in Ha Noi 
shared, “There are two models at schools. The 
first one is that there will be no professional 
counsellor. It’s a little effective but it’s not very 
effective. Because it’s not [teachers’] specialty, 
they just do it from experience and from what 
they observe teaching secondary students. 
The second model is like the model in our 
school. We hire a trained counsellor to support 
students. The effectiveness of this model is 
much higher than the first one.”
While Circular 31 prompted great progress 
towards establishing private counselling spaces 
in each school, interviews made it clear that 
many schools are still lacking these facilities. 
One administrator from a rural province 
estimated that 70% of schools in the district 
lack a specific, private room for counselling. 
Many participants suggested the need for a 
comprehensive approach to supporting 
adolescent student mental health and well-
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
60

----- VN022 page 63 -----
being. They noted the need for professional 
counsellors but spoke to the need for other 
programmes as well. Ideas shared included 
student, teacher, and parent engagement and 
training in mental health, systems for screening 
and assessment of students, improving teacher-
student relationships, and offering life skills and 
well-being classes for students.  
• Student engagement in mental health 
programme. DOET administrators 
expressed concern that students often 
lack awareness of their own mental health 
problems and are reluctant to seek help. 
A related barrier to student help-seeking 
is stigma. One DOET participant shared, 
“Another problem is the lack of students 
coming for consulting. There needs to be 
more incentives to encourage students 
and make them feel welcomed. It [may 
be] the title of the room, ‘mental health 
consulting.’ Why don’t we change the room 
title to ‘Communication,’ or ‘Sharing Room?’ 
It looks intimidating to see the mental 
health term.” 
• Teacher training in mental health. Several 
KI participants reported a need for general 
teacher training in adolescent mental 
health. As an expert from Ha Noi DOET 
stated, “My wish is to have a course for 
teachers that delves into symptoms of 
mental health, early-stage detection, and 
how to spot subtle signs of mental issues or 
traumatic events. Teachers should be able 
to detect early symptoms of mental health 
problems in order to notify the family and 
work out a solution.”
• Train and engage parents. Teachers 
and administrators also noted the need 
for improved communication and 
collaboration with parents in this 
effort. Teachers and administrators agree 
that an important goal is helping parents 
understand their child’s problems and 
support early intervention efforts. A teacher 
in Dong Thap noted that a major barrier 
is parent collaboration and engagement 
when children are developing problems.
• Teacher-student relationships. DOH 
administrators also noted that these 
problems are often overlooked by parents 
and teachers. The administrator from 
Dong Thap reported that large class sizes 
are a barrier to teacher identification and 
support for mental health problems, “There 
are some students who already finish a 
school year, and teachers still don’t know 
them because sometimes the class is too 
crowded up to forty-something students. 
And… some are mentally-ill, like depressed, 
but like the passive kind.”
For specific ideas on how to develop and enact 
these positive changes, one DOET administrator 
suggested that the educational sector look to 
school counselling models already in place. S/
he noted that some private schools, including 
Olympia, Wellspring, and Vinschool, may 
have already developed professional school 
counselling programmes. Semi-public schools 
including Ngo Si Lien in Hoan Kiem and Nguyen 
Tat Thanh School may also have made progress 
in this area. 
For students with more severe mental health 
problems who are in need of expert care, 
participants discussed a need to develop 
systems for referrals for outside support, and to 
overcome family and funding barriers in these 
situations. A principal from Ha Noi reported 
that a major barrier is lack of funding to support 
students who need a higher level of care. 
Currently the school relies on parents to seek 
outside support. But, as the principal explained, 
“I’ve met families who don’t understand. They 
don’t see it as a problem. They think it’s kind of 
a misjudgment by the school or the teacher. 
They think it is a normal expression of a child 
in 6th, 7th, 8th or 9th grade. They think there is 
no need overreact, to intervene with the child’s 
psychological problems. When they don’t 
cooperate, the school still has to support the 
students, but to a fairly limited extent. That is, 
we can only use our own teachers. If we invite 
experts, we have to have funding for that and 
we do not.” 
Beyond the counselling programme, many 
teachers and administrators noted the 
importance of modifying the educational 
curriculum or culture in order to be more 
supportive of adolescent student well-being. 
In Ha Noi, teachers’ suggestions included (a) 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
61
----- VN022 page 64 -----
reducing academic pressure, (b) increasing art 
and sport courses/opportunities for students, 
and (c) teaching more life skills.  As one teacher 
stated, “It’s about our programme system, how 
should we reduce it. We can still value it, but 
we should not attach too much importance 
to the academic subjects like Literature, Maths, 
Chemistry, and English leading to a lot of 
pressure on those subjects. And we have to 
strengthen extra-curricular activities, like life 
skills. Those subjects will help students become 
more mature and they improve their health, like 
more sports, physical activities to promote the 
movement, to help them get stronger. And I 
also want them not only to study well but to be 
healthy, then their life in the future will be much 
more successful… That’s what I want to be able 
to help them. My wish to help them to reduce 
the pressure and increase the physical activities, 
the artistic activities.”
Funding Gaps
While a full evaluation of the funding structure 
of adolescent student health is beyond the 
scope of this study, participants often expressed 
concern regarding the issue of funding. A DOET 
administrator from Gia Lai reported that, while 
Circular 31 development of school counselling 
services, it does not provide funding for this 
effort. This administer described how funding 
must come from already tight school budgets 
which is very difficult, particularly considering a 
current teacher shortage. 
Access to Community-Based Mental 
Health Resources
Another area of need regarding support 
for student mental health and psychosocial 
support is the availability and access to 
community-based mental health resources. 
Students were not aware of any local resources 
for mental health. Students in Dien Bien were 
aware of a nearby psychiatric hospital but when 
asked who received help there they said it was 
for “crazy people,” people with “unstable mind,” 
and people who used drugs. When asked if a 
student who was depressed and suicidal after a 
poor exam could go to the psychiatric hospital 
the students were unsure. 
Other participants also noted the lack 
of community-based services to meet 
children’s mental health needs. A district-level 
administrator in Dien Bien shared that her 
son exhibited a variety of problems including 
hyperactivity, disruptive behaviour at school, 
and trouble concentrating. She describes 
taking her child to the Central Pediatric Hospital 
where he was diagnosed with ADHD based on 
her report of his behaviours. He was prescribed 
a medication that resulted in him sleeping all 
day. She then took him to the Special Education 
Department at the University of Pedagogy 
where he was evaluated and it was determined 
he had a concentration deficit. Treatment 
with a specialist there would have cost a lot of 
money and require much expense and time 
due to travel to Ha Noi. She expressed a hope 
that quality facilities and specialists could be 
based in Dien Bien so she and other families 
could receive quality care for their children. 
The facilities that do exist lack human resources. 
In Dien Bien, a provincial social protection 
centre was built but reportedly has been 
vastly underutilized due to a lack in staff and 
human resources. Also, in Dien Bien, there is 
an Inclusive Education Resource Center which 
provides basic services for children with autism. 
According to administrators in Dien Bien, most 
families of children with problems are unable 
to be served at the two facilities and must 
consider taking their children to Ha Noi, an 
expensive and time-consuming effort. 
Stigma is another barrier for families in need 
of professional psychological care for their 
child. Many parents are reluctant to seek out 
psychiatric care for their children in fear of 
negative social repercussions if the community 
learns of the child’s problem. As someone 
from DOLISA Dien Bien noted, “[Parents] could 
bring their child to medical treatment but they 
also do not want students at school to gossip 
about their kids’ condition.” This fear of stigma 
is major factor in parents’ reluctance to seek 
help for children suffering from mental health 
problems. 
Challenges regarding Ethnic Minority 
and LGBTQ student mental health 
programmes.
Particular challenges in addressing the mental 
health and well-being needs of ethnic minority 
students were shared by a DOET administrator 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
62

----- VN022 page 65 -----
from Dien Bien who reported that school 
counsellors have difficulties engaging and 
coordinating with ethnic minority student 
parents. S/he notes, “The school [counsellors] 
have only been able to cooperate between 
parents in urban areas. In the age of technology 
and information, we can communicate through 
social media platforms such as Zalo, Facebook, 
which I think the urban area has taken advantage 
of pretty well. But in comparison, for the ethnic 
minorities in the rural areas there is a limitation 
imposed by the geographical setting and 
from their understanding of the [Vietnamese] 
language and information technology 
familiarity. This is due to the minorities having 
less phone availability, of which they can call or 
text but inherently lacking the accommodation 
in applications and sensory input.”
Participants expressed a particular need for 
mental health programmes for ethnic minority 
students. The administrator in Dien Bien stated, “I 
think [mental health programme development] 
is a very important matter and vital for the 
development of the educational sector in our 
country, especially for the minority group. This 
is because the children we are dealing with are 
just young students but suffer many impacts 
and disadvantages in terms of historical 
economic development and geographical 
disposition. They have disadvantages in 
communication capability, sharing capability, 
and self-expression or problem-solution 
processing, which can be really negative at 
times. For instance, many [ethnic minority 
students] drop out of school due to various 
issues. Many students just want to graduate 
the 10th grade and hardly anyone remains until 
11th grade after the Tet Holiday. Once we got 
to ask them for the reason, many had said that 
they find studying boring. From that, we can 
see how much pressure these students had to 
face, but hardly any of them tries to share their 
thoughts. We have done the encouragement 
work, students have agreed to keep going to 
school and for example, we go to the student’s 
house and try to persuade them to go back to 
school and so they would promise to go back in 
the next morning. But what happens if they do 
not show up at school the next morning, and 
when we call them, no one picks up, right? That 
makes me think that their students must have 
something to say for themselves, and that they 
want to share some kind of pressure, yet they 
ultimately find it impossible to do. That is why 
I think this is such a huge limitation for ethnic 
minority students. And in my mind, these 
students would have a more secure, healthy 
spiritual life if they could receive some kind of 
mental support...” The administrator noted that 
school support must include helping ethnic 
minority students and families understand 
mental health and how they can access help if 
needed. And s/he expressed a need for more 
research regarding ethnic minority academic, 
social and emotional needs and factors related 
to high rates of school dropout. 
LGBTQ students report varying experiences 
with school psycho-emotional support. 
Informal support in the form of caring 
teachers was experienced as highly positive 
by students. However, LGBTQ students in 
the FGD did not find formal psychological 
supports useful. One student reported that 
their school had a psychology room but did 
not believe that students went there for help. 
When asked why not the student speculated, 
“I think it’s probably like, going there won’t do 
anything, or they are afraid of having to deal 
with teachers since teachers in the psychology 
room are also teachers in school. So, I feel like 
she could know everything I have told her and 
I feel uncomfortable.” When asked what else 
schools could do to support LGBTQ students’ 
mental health and well-being, students in the 
FGD agreed that schools should provide more 
formal sex education programmes, including 
education on sexual orientation and gender 
diversity. One student stated, “I see that not 
only schools but the whole country in general, 
our country is afraid when talking about these 
problems and feels wrong to talk about these 
problems. So, we need to put more emphasis 
on it, making it a real class and treating it like 
a real subject. For example, firstly education on 
sex education of men and women, and then on 
gender equality and LGBTQ so that people see 
members of the LGBT community as normal 
people like themselves. Plus, the fact that I 
feel like we should be able to get rid of sexist 
issues like gender stereotypes. For example, it 
doesn’t matter if it is a girl with long hair, why 
do we have ideas that girls can’t have short 
hair or boys can’t have long hair. If a boy wants 
to  have  long hair or wear a skirt, I feel it’s his 
right [and] he shouldn’t be judged for that.”
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
63
----- VN022 page 66 -----
Chapter 8:  
Adolescent Student MHPSS 
Policies and Programmes in 
Viet Nam: Social and Health 
Sectors, and Cross-Sector 
Collaboration
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
64

----- VN022 page 67 -----
Key Findings
1. Since 2011 MOLISA has established policies providing for the development of community-based 
mental health care for children and adults. 
2. MOLISA experts and administrators report a need for a specific mental health programme for 
children and adolescents focused on prevention of mental health problems via promotion of 
safety in the home and through teaching parents, adolescents and community members how to 
recognize early signs of MH problems and where to go for help.  
3. Identified areas of need for MOLISA regarding adolescent student mental health include:
a. Establishing standards for quality of services and effective M&E procedures for continuous 
improvement of community services. 
b. Development of community MH human resources.
4. Since 1999 the MOH has been responsible for community-based MH care. Initial focus was on 
severe mental illness in adults. Since 2005 MOH has expanded focus to common MH disorders, 
including depression and anxiety, and pediatric MH.
5. The MOH is currently developing policies and programmes focused on common child and 
adolescent mental health problems including anxiety disorders, depression, and behavioural 
disorders.  
a. Identified areas of need for MOH regarding adolescent student mental health include:
b. Training for district administrators and school medical staff in adolescent mental health. 
c. Development of human resources, specifically in the area of adolescent psychiatry. 
6. Education and Social Sector collaboration would be improved by:
a. Systems for sharing information regarding students at-risk and in need of support.
b. Social sector support for adolescent students via in-school MH literacy programmes and 
counselling for students.
7. Education and Health sector collaboration would be improved by:
a. Training for school medical staff in the areas of school-based mental health screening, risk 
assessment, and mental health care protocols for referral of students in need of professional 
mental health care. 
b. Health sector support for improving mental health literacy among students, teachers and 
parents to facilitate early identification of and intervention for student MH problems. 
8. Experts agreed that a National Strategy on Mental Health involving collaboration and coordination 
of health, education and social sectors is needed. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
65
----- VN022 page 68 -----
8.1. MOLISA Policies
Prime Minister Decision No. 1215/QD-TTg 
from July 2011 provides for community-based 
social assistance and rehabilitation for people 
with mental illness and mental disorders for 
the period of 2011 – 2020. This policy sets goals 
for prevention and care of mental disorders 
within the community. Activities outlined by 
the policy include (a) the development of 
Social Protection Centre facilities, including 
20 facilities around the country and at least 3 
regional SPCs, (b) increasing provincial capacity 
to support people with mental disorders, (c) 
increase human resources for the prevention 
and treatment of mental disorders via training 
for social workers and affected families and 
(d) pilot and scale-up effective models of 
community-based prevention and treatment 
of mental disorders. The Circular establishes 
cross-sector collaboration in this effort. The 
MOH is directed to support mental health 
treatment capacity building by integrating 
research and expertise into training and 
development. The MOET is directed to integrate 
life skills education for students into schools, 
to implement programmes in schools for the 
prevention and early intervention of students 
with mental disorders, and to coordinate with 
the health sector to care for students with 
mental disorders.
This Decision was followed by Prime Minister 
Decision No. 1929/QD-TTg dated November 
25, 2020 approving the community-based 
social assistance and mental rehabilitation 
programme, including for children with autism 
and people with mental disorders, for the 
period 2021-2030. The subsequent Decision 
No. 1069/QD-LDTBXH dated September 27, 
2021 of the Ministry of Labour, Invalids and 
Social Affairs established the Plan to implement 
the Programme on social assistance and mental 
rehabilitation, autistic children and community-
based psychosis for the period 2021-2030.
Prime Minister Decision No: 112/QD-TTg  
in January 2021 established policy to further 
promote the development of social work 
during the 2021 – 2030 timeframe by raising 
public awareness of social work activities and 
improving the quality of social work services.  
While this Decision is focused on social work 
development more broadly, mental health is 
specifically mentioned in section 2.7.a. which 
directs MOLISA to “Communicate and raise 
the awareness of authorities at different 
levels and sectors, and communities 
regarding the role and position of social 
work and social work service delivery 
facilities in mental healthcare and 
healthcare for people with disabilities, the 
elderly, children with special circumstances, 
and other disadvantaged groups.” Of specific 
importance to the development of school-
based mental health care is Section IV. Article 
2.5 which addresses MOET’s role: “Ministry of 
Education and Training (MOET) shall assume 
the prime responsibility and collaborate with 
related Ministries, sectors, and agencies to… 
improve the quality of social work trainers 
and establish the network of social work 
public employees and workers at schools.” 
Additionally, objectives include expansion of 
social workers in schools, with at least 50% 
of education facilities providing social work 
services as planned by 2025 (Objective 2.a.) and 
to reach at least 60% of education facilities by 
2030 in comparison to 2025 (Objective 2.b.). In 
conclusion, Prime Minister Decision No. 112/
QD-T Tg sets policy for the intersection of social 
work and education, and briefly recognizes 
the role of social work in addressing mental 
health, although it is contextualized within 
healthcare for “disadvantaged groups” rather 
than community groups such as students 
within schools. 
Related policies include Prime Minister’s 
Decision No.1437/QD-TTg (approved October 
2018) on approving the 2018 - 2025 scheme on 
care for the comprehensive development of 
children in the early years of their family and 
community life. This policy demonstrates the 
national effort to promote early childhood 
development ensuring physical, cognitive, 
emotional development and equitable access 
to supporting services for children.  However, 
as it is focused on children under eight it is not 
directly relevant to adolescent mental health. 
A MOLISA expert described collaboration with 
UNICEF in developing and evaluating models 
of implementation related to the policy. 
UNICEF supported a learning programme for 
programme developers and implemented a 
parenting support model in three provinces. 
Pilot results will inform next steps including a 
plan for nationwide programme scale up. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
66

----- VN022 page 69 -----
The 2016 Law on Children provides a legal 
foundation for children’s rights in Viet Nam 
and institutionalizes guidelines and policies 
guaranteeing the enforcement of children’s 
rights in the spirit of the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of the Child. The 
Law on Children provides regulations ensuring 
various children’s rights, including the right 
of privacy, the right to live with parents, 
the right to be adopted and the right to be 
protected from abuse including violence, 
sexual harassment, labour exploitation, 
abandonment and kidnapping. While this 
Law is an important policy related to reducing 
major risk factors for child mental health 
problems, it does not specifically address or 
provide support for adolescent mental health 
and well-being. Another related policy is Prime 
Minister Decision 1438 (October 29, 2018) 
which establishes a National Framework for 
supporting children with disabilities, including 
access to community-based protection, care, 
and education services, for the period 2018-
2025.
An expert from MOLISA shared the many 
general ways that these policies support 
children’s mental health and well-being. 
However, this expert that MOLISA may need 
to develop more specific child mental health 
policies and programmes. As she states, 
“Honestly speaking, current programmes and 
projects are available, but we may need to 
issue a separate programme, a separate mental 
health project for children. It is necessary to 
have specific intervention solutions to prevent 
mental disorders in children, as well as ones to 
provide timely support for children.” According 
to this expert, prevention programmes should 
(1) promote safe family environment to prevent 
trauma, (2) give parents tools to recognize early 
signs of mental health problems, (3) teach 
children about mental health and early signs 
of problems and how to mitigate risk, and (4) 
provide toolkits for widespread basic mental 
health literacy, and for improving community 
capacity to detect early warning signs of 
problems and make appropriate referrals. 
The MOLISA expert also discussed a need 
for mental health intervention programmes, 
including policies, regulations, and criteria 
for ensuring quality services. She notes that, 
“At the present, psychological or mental 
health support services for children can be 
found in hospitals, maybe in educational 
institutions, and less often in some non-public 
facilities. But the question is what are the 
service standards?  What are the standards of 
counsellors, and what are the conditions? We 
must review it to have something specific. 
In addition, we need to have monitoring and 
evaluation, then supervisory agencies for the 
implementation of programmes and plans in 
general.” 
8.2. Social Sector Programmes 
and Services
MOLISA’s service sector includes some school-
based services. As the MOLISA expert shared, 
some schools have incorporated social work 
providers to provide psychological support for 
students. However, it was noted that in most 
schools, medical staff are in charge of children’s 
health, but they are often part-time and not 
equipped to cover mental health. The social 
service sector also has child management 
officers in the community working with a 
team of social work collaborators in case 
management. In this capacity they may provide 
mental health assessment for children, although 
she acknowledges that the case management 
officers do not always have sufficient training 
for high quality service. 
MOLISA also supports training of families, 
students and community members in areas 
relevant to child health and well-being. For 
example, a Ha Noi DOLISA administrator shared 
about a programme for training parents in 
parenting skills, including parents’ ability to 
recognize and support children’s problems. 
The administrator shared that the programme 
aims to help parents “have capability to identify 
problems, including what approach [the 
children] need, how to work with them in the 
process of growing up.” It is possible that mental 
health content can be integrated into MOLISA-
supported parenting programmes.  
The Ha Noi DOLISA offers services via the Ha Noi 
Social Work Centre. Although these services are 
focused primarily on young children, a KI from 
Ha Noi DOLISA reported that the social work 
centre’s goal is to “support children and families 
in cases where the family encounters difficulties 
in child rearing or children’s problems.”
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
67
----- VN022 page 70 -----
Another MOLISA service provided since 2017 is 
Viet Nam’s Department of Child Affairs (DCA)
national child protection hotline (111). This 
hotline offers 24 hours telephone support to 
underage victims of abuse, exploitation and 
trafficking. DCA has three call centres in the 
north, central and southern regions of the 
county to address geographical differences 
in speaking accent to help children calling 
from all areas feel comfortable. Reports from 
the Department of Child Affairs under the 
MOLISA showed that after nearly 16 years of 
operating the hotline 111, the department has 
received over 4 million calls to discuss issues 
related to children. According to the MOLISA 
administrator, the hotline staff are all are trained 
on mental health issues in children.
Human resources are reported to be a concern 
for social sector service delivery. A MOLISA 
expert described a lack of training in child 
mental health; “At the ministry level have 
some people specialized in mental health. The 
Department of Children Affairs has a Child Care 
Room in which there are staff directly assigned 
to monitor issues related to mental health. But as 
you move to provincial, district and commune 
level there are no specialists. Within the DOLISA 
department you will have one person in charge 
of all children issues, including mental health.” 
Child protection officers are training in child 
abuse and prevention and some topics related 
to mental health, including detection of early 
psychological signs that may affect the child, 
such as anxiety or irritability. An example of 
how this lack of trained human resources 
impact child services was shared by a DOLISA 
administrator from Dong Thap. He explained, 
“There is the 01 Circular which has just been 
carried out including the evaluation and review 
process of autistic children. The Evaluation 
Council of Disabled Children at Commune 
Level hasn’t been capable of identifying autistic 
symptoms since the state lacks in-depth 
medical knowledge. Therefore, the council had 
to take the results to the central-level hospital 
for evaluation as the provincial level hospitals 
are out of touch. By the time the patient was 
been admitted to the central-level hospital, the 
symptoms have become severe. Thus, I think 
the first evaluation and review process needs 
to be carried out earlier to quickly intervene in 
the cases of children with signs of depression, 
autism or hyperactivity.” Administrators within 
the social sector recommended training in 
child and adolescent mental health for social 
work centre staff.
Social sector human resources may also be 
overtaxed. As one DOLISA administrator shared, 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
68

----- VN022 page 71 -----
social workers at “that grassroots level  carry a 
very hectic workload, I think that is also a huge 
barrier, a very difficult problem.”
Thinking holistically, a participant from Ha 
Noi DOLISA considered how the community 
can support positive child and adolescent 
well-being by providing more opportunities 
for engagement in positive activities; “in the 
education sector, in the organizations and 
unions, such as the Women’s Union and the 
Youth Union, they can do a lot of things related 
to  children, including improving parent-child 
interactions, improving school environments, 
and creating  teams, activity groups, clubs 
for children. These activities really promote 
the children’s participation and well-being.”
8.3. MOH Policies
MOH support for mental disorders began 
in 1999 with Prime Minister Decision 
Community Based Mental Health Care 
Project, entrusting mental health treatment to 
the health sector. This Decision emphasized the 
implementation of a community mental health 
programme. In 2000, the Minister of Health 
assigned the Mental Health Service to launch 
the National Targeted Programme on Mental 
Health, for the entire population. From 2000 
to 2006, the Mental Health Care Programme 
target the care and treatment of schizophrenia. 
The focus was then expanded to include a 
programme for epilepsy. The activities of this 
programme include mental health training of 
health staff and health collaborators, as well 
as household surveys to identify depression 
and epilepsy patients, monthly delivery of 
medicines for patients, and monitoring and 
supporting patients through medicine and 
health education through village media. 
Since 2015, the programme has begun to 
focus on common mental health problems, 
including depression and anxiety, and on 
pediatric mental health, including autism and 
ADHD. Major barriers to progress in this area 
include a lack of medical staff with training 
and experience in child and adolescent mental 
health. With the guidance of these policies, 
considerable progress has been made towards 
the development of community-based mental 
health care for severe mental illness. However, 
screening, care and treatment for depression, 
anxiety and other common mental health 
problems is lacking. And human resource 
development is necessary in order to expand 
and improve mental health care for children 
and adolescents (Cuong, 2017). 
Recent policies related to mental health 
include Prime Minister Decision No. 155/
QD-TTg dated January 29, 2022 by which the 
government approved the National Plan for 
prevention and control of non-communicable 
diseases and mental health disorders for the 
period 2022-2025. Decision No. 712/QD-BYT 
dated March 21, 2022 issued by the Ministry of 
Health establishes a plan for the development 
of social work in the health sector for the period 
of 2021-2030.
According to a MOH expert, the MOH currently 
has no specific policies regarding the mental 
health of students. As the expert described, the 
community mental health care programme 
focused on epilepsy, providing free medication 
and treatment for children with epilepsy. The 
expert noted that, “However, mental disorders 
in children that are caused by eco-social 
development and industrialization are not 
addressed, like emotional disorders, behaviour 
disorders, suicide in adolescents or children. To 
be honest, those problems are not addressed.” 
He shared that the MOH, Department of 
Preventive Medicine together with the Medical 
Examination and Treatment Administration are 
developing an action plan that includes mental 
health in the non-communicable disease 
sector. This plan would include child and 
adolescent mental health problems including 
anxiety disorders, depression, and behavioural 
disorders. 
8.4. Health Sector Programmes 
and Services
MOH and provincial health departments do 
not appear to have school-based programmes 
regarding student mental health. An 
administrator from Ha Noi DOH shared that 
the ministry has a programme to improve 
reproductive health care for adolescents. 
The programme involves visiting secondary 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
69
----- VN022 page 72 -----
and high schools to talk with students about 
reproductive health, including biological and 
psychological development. The programme 
also includes courses to train teachers in 
adolescent reproductive health so that 
teachers will have skills to support students 
with problems. MOH also provides short 
training courses for medical staff in the area of 
reproductive health care for adolescents.
In spite of recognition of the importance of 
adolescent mental health, health experts agree 
that they lack training about mental health and 
are ill-equipped to support schools or students 
in this area. An administrator in charge of the 
school health department for Dong Thap shared 
that she has had no training in psychiatry, or 
anything related to child adolescent MH. She 
recounted a case where school health staff  
member consulted with her about a students’ 
concerning behaviours. Without any training, 
she was only able to suggest monitoring the 
student and she did not know where to go for 
further support. A participant from Dien Bien 
DOH reported that he received no training on 
mental health in medical school and believes 
medical schools should include mental health 
in the curriculum. An administrator from 
Dong Thap DOH commented, “I want to have 
knowledge and a procedure so I can instruct 
the school. But now I don’t even know a thing 
about psychology. So, when it comes to advising 
[schools] I am not advising. Merely observing. I 
also want to help but I have no possession to 
assist them. Like this case of a girl in Sa Dec who 
tore paper. Without psychological knowledge 
I just said, ‘Well, observe (the student) for now, 
tell me if something’s up.’ Because I had not 
been equipped with psychological knowledge 
at all, I cannot say anything else. My longing is a 
longing for knowledge of students’ psychology, 
nothing else, only with that can I do my work.” 
Interviews with provincial health department 
experts indicate a need for training of the 
public health sector in child and adolescent 
mental health, and a need to develop linkages 
with provincial psychiatric hospital resources. 
DOH health administrators report that the 
school medical staff position lacks capacity to 
support mental health. A participant from Ha 
Noi DOH described the role of the medical 
staff position as addressing student physical 
health needs and organizing topic discussions 
for students. They support the school regarding 
certain health concerns, for example myopia 
and COVID- 19 prevention. However, health 
sector participants generally agree that school 
medical staff are unable to provide mental 
health support due to “no training provided and 
the fact that those are not professionals. That 
also explains why the medical room or channel 
cannot be suitable for long term mental health 
checkup or consulting work since they have 
indisputable limitations.”
A major barrier to health sector support for 
adolescent student mental health is lack 
of specialized medical experts. According 
to the MOH expert, “Doctors specialized in 
mental health are insufficient, not to mention 
pediatric mental health doctors. There are 
very few of them trained in pediatric mental 
health care.” Underlying causes of insufficient 
human resources include stigma from within 
the medical field where psychiatrists are not 
respected, and stigma from within the culture 
and community where mental health is not 
valued. As described by the MOH expert, 
“People working in the mental health field have 
lower status than other medical departments. 
That’s why the mental health specialty is not 
the priority of students when it comes to 
choosing a specialty. There are some medical 
staff that I know, who have to hide from their 
family the fact that they work in a psychiatric 
hospital. There are doctors who keep it secret 
for many years, even when they get married. 
It’s an inequality in the healthcare industry. It 
attracts few students. The other reason is that, 
in Viet Nam society, people don’t pay much 
attention to this matter. They care more about 
other diseases. Parents don’t think it’s a problem 
when children have emotional disorders, like, 
when children get easily upset or cry all the 
time or have mood swings. They don’t think 
it’s a problem. Family, and then society, they 
don’t care about that matter. So, they wouldn’t 
take children to see a doctor. Another reason 
is the working environment in psychiatric 
hospitals. Infrastructure is not upgraded. 
Facilities are deteriorating. That’s why there are 
few people choosing this specialty.” To address 
this barrier, MOH plans to submit the Medical 
Examination and Treatment Law for approval. 
This law would offer enticements to medical 
students to study certain specialties, including 
psychiatry.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
70

----- VN022 page 73 -----
Another human resource barrier concerns the 
lack of a professional employment code for 
Psychologist. As the MOH participant described, 
MOH is waiting for finalization of a proposal 
regarding this issue and plans to then submit 
the proposal to the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Other concerns include the quality of care 
provided for adolescent mental health 
problems. While many hospitals and health 
clinics have expanded services for autism, the 
quality of services for other types of mental 
health problems is inconsistent. 
8.5. Cross-Sector Collaboration 
in Adolescent Student Mental 
Health
8.5.1. Education and Social Sector 
Collaboration
Evidence for cross-sector collaboration 
between MOET and MOLISA includes 
programmes to support implementation 
the 2016 Children’s Law regarding children’s 
rights in schools. This programme includes a 
general procedure for supporting children, 
including case management from DOLISA, and 
coordination with school and health agencies 
around individual child needs.  
Participants reported other existing 
collaboration at the commune or district level. 
For example, an administrator for DOLISA in 
Dien Bien reported that DOLISA was supporting 
DOET in the area of training for teachers on 
disability assessment and evaluation. There is 
also some coordination in the area of autism. 
As autism is now included in Government 
Decision 1438’s policies on support for children 
with disabilities, MOLISA is working with MOET 
and MOH to review policies and programmes 
regarding coordination of early detection and 
care for children with autism. 
While these efforts are promising, there is 
evidence that coordination and collaboration 
between education and social sectors is lacking 
and the majority of coordination efforts have 
focused on younger children rather than 
adolescents. This was confirmed by a MOLISA 
expert who reported that coordination between 
the two sectors remains “very fragmented.” 
One area in need of improved collaboration 
is sharing of relevant information and data. A 
DOET administrator from Ha Noi expressed 
concern about the coordination between 
education and social sectors. S/he understood 
that DOLISA had activities regarding 
adolescent mental health, but has not seen 
data regarding this work. S/he would like to see 
more sharing of data in order to have a clearer 
picture of adolescent mental health needs and 
potential interventions.  A MOLISA expert also 
emphasized the need for systems for sharing 
information about at-risk students who could 
then refer students in need of higher-level 
care to social work centres. This expert stressed 
that a particular focus for collaboration should 
be around adolescent suicide where data 
sharing could inform cross-sector prevention 
programmes. 
An expert from MOLISA shared about an 
opportunity to expand MOET-MOLISA 
collaboration for adolescent student mental 
health. Recently, MOET worked with MOLISA 
on the National School Health Project for the 
period 2021-2025 which was approved by 
the Prime Minister in Decision #1660 dated 
October 2, 2021 and launched on February 10, 
2022. Areas of focus include assessment of risk 
factors for student mental health problems, 
improving students’ knowledge about mental 
health, and providing developmentally 
appropriate counselling on psychophysiology 
and mental health in schools. The plan is for 
these areas to be developed via collaboration 
between MOET and MOLISA.
8.5.2. Education and Health Sector 
Collaboration
Education and health sectors have had some 
collaboration in the area of adolescent student 
mental health. An administrator from Ha Noi 
DOH shared examples of collaboration including 
DOH providing training to teachers regarding 
student development and reproductive health. 
Furthermore, schools “invited experts to talk 
with parents so that parents could understand 
more about the biological and psychological 
state of their children.” 
However, coordination and collaboration 
between the two sectors is generally lacking. 
Administrators from both sectors agreed 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
71
----- VN022 page 74 -----
that very little coordination occurs. DOET 
administrators from Gia Lai and Dien Bien 
shared that school medical staff are not trained 
in counselling and there is no connection with 
district or provincial psychiatric hospitals or 
departments. 
A MOH expert affirmed the lack of formal 
coordination between MOH, MOET and 
MOLISA in the area of student mental health. S/
he reported that the three ministries proposed 
areas of cooperation in the implementation 
of the National Strategy on Mental Health but 
that the government restructured the strategy 
to focus on one strategy per Ministry. The 
MOH expert asserted that MOH would like to 
cooperate with MOET regarding adolescent 
mental health but “the problem is that there is no 
protocol to maintain that kind of cooperation, 
to keep it frequent. There is no communication. 
So, we just do our jobs. If there is a protocol 
indicating that we should have meetings 
regularly, to exchange information, then the 
cooperation between two departments to do 
task A, task B would happen naturally.” 
Education and health participants expressed 
enthusiasm for collaboration and shared 
many ideas for how the two sectors can work 
together to benefit adolescent mental health. 
An administrator from Gia Lai DOH was eager 
to consider opportunities to work with schools 
and noted that the health sector could raise 
mental health awareness among teachers and 
students and promote referrals to the hospital 
for serious problems. An administrator from Gia 
Lai DOET shared this enthusiasm and suggested 
an annual meeting between school leadership 
and psychiatric departments or hospitals. This 
meeting would be an opportunity for the 
medical sector to share with the educational 
sector about common mental health problems 
in students, signs of adolescent problems, 
available mental health services, and how to 
refer students in need of higher-level support. 
Collaboration between MOH and MOET 
would be optimized by clear roles regarding 
adolescent student mental health efforts. 
Experts noted areas for collaboration, including 
screening, risk assessment, mental health care 
protocols, and action plans. Clear responsibilities 
for relevant Ministry departments will maximize 
the likelihood of successful implementation. 
The MOH expert affirmed the significant 
need for adolescent mental health care. The 
expert shared that MOH should first focus on 
improving the mental health knowledge of 
adolescent students and their parents; “If we 
just support students without changes from 
the living environment or family, it would be 
really hard. There must be a synchronization, 
from family environment to society to schools.” 
The expert also recommended that MOH work 
with MOET to develop teacher and counsellor 
training programmes for the purpose of 
early identification of student mental health 
problems. School-based screening would allow 
for early intervention, and referrals for children 
in need of expert treatment to medical centres 
or hospitals. 
A participant from Ha Noi DOH reinforced 
the importance of teacher training for early 
identification of student mental health 
problems. He suggested that, “Teachers should 
be trained and provided with basic knowledge 
about adolescent mental health. They need to 
be equipped with tools to screen, to evaluate 
common disorders. For instance, they should 
have a short checklist for symptoms. When a 
student shows symptoms, teachers can use 
that checklist to identify [students at-risk] and 
then invite psychiatrists to work with that 
student. There should be cooperation among 
psychiatric hospitals and schools in the matter 
of students’ mental health.”
An administrator from Dong Thap discussed 
collaboration needs and suggested that 
health, social and education sectors jointly 
receive training and work on a joint policy 
for collaboration and MH service provision. 
She reflected this this was done in the area of 
nutrition and thought the process for nutrition 
could serve as a useful model for building 
cross-sector collaboration in adolescent 
mental health. The expert in Dien Bien agreed, 
stating “In terms of official written documents, 
I would support the proposal for a special 
policy development and implementation 
coordination between institutions, especially in 
the Education Ministry. They can work together 
to develop vital mental impact techniques for 
adolescent children.”
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
72

----- VN022 page 75 -----
Chapter 9  
Conclusions and 
Recommendations
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
73
----- VN022 page 76 -----
Conclusions
UNICEF has collaborated with the Ministry of 
Education to study the relationship between 
school-related factors and the mental health 
and well-being of adolescent girls and boys. 
Results of this research will inform development 
of school-based interventions targeting 
adolescent mental health and well-being. 
The research integrates data from various 
geographical regions of Viet Nam, across 
relevant sectors (education, health, and social 
sectors), and levels of the system (student, 
family, school, local and national governance). 
Study findings provide international and 
national context for these issues, and 
include results from primary quantitative 
and qualitative research into adolescent 
student mental health, school based factors 
including school climate, academic pressure 
and bullying, perceptions of needs, existing 
policies, programmes and services from all 
stakeholders, and opportunities for improving 
support for adolescent students as they strive 
to become healthy adults capable of making a 
positive impact on the world.  
Adolescent students in Viet Nam are bright 
young people with big dreams. They love to 
learn new things, care about their family and 
friends, and strive to be active and successful 
at school and at home. Adolescent students 
report a range of mental health problems, 
including emotional problems, peer problems, 
hyperactivity and conduct problems. About 
26% of students report current symptoms 
associated with moderate- or high-risk for 
mental health problems. Girls are at higher risk 
for emotional problems compared to boys, 
and high school students are at higher risk 
compared to secondary school students. 
All stakeholders recognize the importance 
of adolescent mental health and well-being. 
Teachers, principals and administrators from 
educational, social and health sectors all agree 
that adolescent mental health is an area of 
concern. While parents struggle to understand 
and support their teenagers, parents 
demonstrated less knowledge of student 
mental health symptoms and risk-factors, and 
expressed less concern about the issue. Ethnic 
minority students and LGBTQ students may 
be at particular risk for mental health and well-
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
74

----- VN022 page 77 -----
being problems due to a variety of risk factors. 
A number of school-related factors place 
students at risk for mental health problems. 
School climate factors were moderately 
related to student mental health problems, 
with student perceptions of school safety, 
student engagement in school, and the 
school environment all associated with 
student mental health. Academic pressure 
was strongly associated with student mental 
health. Student experiences of study pressure, 
worries about grades, despondency related to 
academics, self-expectations, and workload 
were all significantly related to mental health 
problems. Girls are at higher risk for academic 
pressure than boys. Student lack of sleep and 
experiences with bullying were concerning for 
students and stakeholders alike. 
Results found widespread concern among 
participants regarding academic pressure. 
There was general agreement that pressure 
from teachers and parents, high workload, 
and stress related to grades and exams have 
a negative impact on student mental health, 
harming students’ emotional, social, and 
academic development and placing some 
students at risk for negative life trajectories. 
Underlying causes of academic pressure were 
explored, and recommendations made for 
how to improve student emotional support 
and learning at school. 
Educational policies and programmes 
regarding adolescent student mental health 
aim to establish basic counselling services 
in secondary and high schools, including 
facilities and trained human resources. While 
progress has been made, evidence indicated 
gaps between policy and implementation. 
Many schools lack designated counselling 
rooms and adequately trained counsellors. 
Most schools put poorly trained teachers 
or administrators in the role of counsellor, 
leading to a variety of problems. The school 
community, including students, teachers 
and parents, lack mental health knowledge 
contributing to missed opportunities for 
student support and early identification of 
student mental health problems. Prevention 
efforts must include mental health literacy 
training and systemic efforts to bolster 
student-teacher relationships. 
Social sector policies directly provide for 
development of social work for mental health 
care, including care in the context of schools. 
Social sector policies provide for parent 
training programmes and community mental 
health services, both of which are relevant to 
adolescent student mental health. However, 
these programmes are not always available 
or sufficient in practice. Specific programmes 
addressing adolescent mental health in 
schools are lacking, and currently there is little 
direct social work service provision in schools. 
Collaboration between social and education 
sectors must be strengthened to benefit 
adolescent students. 
Health sector policies entrust mental health 
treatment to the health sector, but do not 
directly address adolescent student mental 
health. Health sector programmes within 
schools address mental health indirectly. 
Medical staff in schools lack training and 
capacity for mental health care support. 
And there is a lack of coordination between 
schools and psychiatric service providers. 
Collaboration between health and education 
sectors must be strengthened to benefit 
adolescent students. 
Systemic strengths include widespread 
understanding of the importance of adolescent 
student mental health on developmental 
outcomes, and a strong commitment to 
improving policies, programme and service 
provided to support students. Participants 
from all sectors are committed to working 
together and shared ideas for progress that 
reflect shared understanding of barriers and 
paths forward. 
Although not directly assessed in the current 
research, there is significant evidence that 
COVID-19 has caused significant stress for 
children and families around the world, and 
in Viet Nam. Stakeholders shared concern 
regarding the impact of the pandemic on 
student health and well-being. Pandemic-
related stress and associated risks remain a 
compelling reason for urgently addressing 
issues of adolescent student mental health.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
75
----- VN022 page 78 -----
The following recommendations are offered for consideration by MOET and partner agencies, 
MOH and MOLISA, and UNICEF as they work to promote adolescent student mental health and 
well-being. 
A. EDUCATION SECTOR RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Holistic and whole school-based approaches to improving student well-being and 
building student resiliency. School climate is the context for child and adolescent learning and 
development at school. This context includes fundamental factors such as student relationships 
with teachers and peers, the school environment, student, parent, and teacher engagement, 
and students’ experiences of safety at school. A positive, supportive school climate is essential for 
student learning and well-being. Specific recommendations regarding school climate include: 
b. Promote positive teacher-student relationships. Universal school-based mental 
health promotion programmes see that the quality of teacher-student relationships predict 
outcomes. Stakeholders shared models for improving teacher-student relationships, including 
restructuring class schedules so that students meet with certain teachers twice/day; integrating 
time for student-teacher sharing and support into the standard curriculum; prioritizing 
teacher-student relationships such that teachers receive recognition or are evaluated based 
on quality of relationships; and reducing class sizes. 
c. Prohibit the use of physical discipline in schools. Related to the issue of adolescent 
student well-being is the critical need to eliminate physical discipline in schools. Policies and 
practices must clearly communicate that physical discipline is not tolerated in classrooms. 
Importantly, teachers must be equipped with the skills to motivate students and implement 
positive, non-violent discipline. Teacher training programmes and in-service professional 
development opportunities can train and support teachers’ use of these skills.
d. Promote student engagement and connection to school. Student well-being is improved 
by engagement with peers in cocurricular and extracurricular activities, including arts, 
sports, clubs, etc. Activities provide students with valuable opportunities for developing skills 
for problem solving, communication, relationship building, and emotional resilience. Activities 
provide opportunities for students to “shine,” increasing their motivation and engagement in 
school and life. Inclusion of activities into students’ day will teach students to value health, 
relationships, and balance in life. Most stakeholders believe that the current educational 
system does not value or support extracurricular activities enough.
e. Promote kindness and positive peer relationships. Student experiences of bullying 
represent one of their biggest challenges and there is strong evidence that bullying puts students 
at risk for mental health problems and negative life outcomes. Schools can reduce bullying by 
Recommendations
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
76

----- VN022 page 79 -----
celebrating kindness and positive peer relationships as deeply held school value, recognizing 
and honouring students who demonstrate kindness, and having clear expectations for student 
behaviour with consequences for bullying. Specific bullying prevention programmes exist and 
may be adapted when needed.
f. Reduce academic pressure. All stakeholders agree that students are under significant 
academic pressure and students experiences of academic pressure, including study pressure, 
worries about grades, despondency related to academics, self-expectations, and workload, 
were all significantly related to student mental health problems. Girls are particularly vulnerable 
to academic pressure. It is clear that reducing academic pressure will be a significant challenge 
as many systemic, underlying factors contribute to this problem. Teacher training and 
evaluation, examination schedules and focus, beliefs about learning objectives and outcomes, 
etc. all contribute to the current culture of high pressure. MOET may consider a path forward, 
such as a task force designated to addressing this issue, and inclusion of an academic pressure 
evaluation process within each department and activity. Prioritizing student approaches to 
learning, including skills for communication, collaboration, problem-solving, creativity, and 
reflection, may be empathized over subject content to enhance learning objectives while 
reducing academic pressure. 
2. Universal approaches directly targeting mental health and well-being.
a. Improve teacher, parent and student mental health literacy. Stakeholders did not have a 
shared understanding of student mental health. The whole school community must be more 
knowledgeable about common mental health problems and symptoms, the prevalence of 
these problems among students, factors that place students at risk for problems, and strategies 
for reducing risk. Teachers and parents especially need to recognize symptoms of serious 
mental health problems, and know when and how to seek professional help for their students/
children. A large-scale campaign to promote mental health literacy will provide a strong 
foundation for further prevention and intervention efforts. Outreach to ethnic minority 
parents and students must be a high priority. 
b. Teach students skills necessary for positive mental health and well-being. The 
acquisition of social and emotional skills is associated with positive youth development, 
academic achievement, healthy lifestyle behaviours, and reductions in depression and anxiety, 
violence, bullying, conflict, and anger. Crucial life skills for adolescents include emotion 
regulation, problem-solving, communication, conflict resolution, and maintaining healthy 
relationships. School-based programmes aimed to enhance these skills go beyond a problem-
focused approach to embrace a more positive view of health. Life skills programmes should be 
integrated into the school curriculum. 
i. Sexual education may be provided in partnership with education on mental health and well-
being. Many students, teachers and parents express concern regarding sexual relationships. 
Skills for healthy and respectful (non-violent) romantic relationships and sexual health are 
necessary for promoting adolescent health and resiliency. These programmes should 
also include inclusive, non-judgmental information about sexual orientation and gender 
identity to reduce LGBTQ student discrimination and improve LGBTQ student mental 
health. UNICEF’s Comprehensive Sexuality Education Framework offers guidance on how 
this type of program can best be developed and implemented. 
3. Targeted stepped-care approach to early identification and intervention for students 
with mental health problems. All stakeholders agree on the need to improve capacity to identify 
children with problems early and provide them with the support they need to reduce mental health 
symptoms and regain full health and functioning. Currently, very few schools have the capacity 
for early identification of student mental health problems. And while some schools have highly 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
77
----- VN022 page 80 -----
capable counsellors to support students in need, the vast majority of schools do not. Currently, 
most schools offering counselling assign teachers to the counselling role. There are numerous, 
clear limitations to this model and most participants agreed that professional counselling services 
are needed.
a. Provide for early identification of student mental health problems. This begins with 
improved mental health literacy among teachers and parents, however knowledge alone is not 
sufficient. A screening programme is recommended to more consistently identify students at-
risk for problems. Participants shared models for screening, including charging school medical 
or counselling staff with student screening. Brief screening of all students or those deemed at-
risk must occur within the context of available school counselling support, parent engagement 
in the programme, and access to specialized psychiatric and psychological services. Screening 
programmes must prioritize student and parent consent and confidentiality of personal 
mental health information. 
i. The recently established School Health Programme for the period 2021-2025 (Prime 
Minister Decision No. 1660/QD-TTg, October 2, 2021 and Prime Minister Decision No. 
85/QD-TTg, January 17, 2022) may offer policy support for expanding the role of school 
health workers to include screening for the early detection of mental health problems in 
adolescent students. 
ii. With MOET guidance, DOETs will need to identify local resources for professional mental 
health treatment (e.g., psychiatric hospitals or departments, psychological clinics, social 
protection centres offering adolescent counselling services). Referral pathways for each 
district should be developed and shared with all secondary and high schools in the district. 
b. Provide professional school-based counselling for students with moderate-level 
mental health problems. An official position for School Counsellor must be established. 
School counsellors should have training in adolescent development, adolescent mental 
health, basic mental health assessment and treatment planning, group and individual 
evidenced-based interventions for common mental health problems, coordination with 
teachers and parents in supporting students, and referrals for students with severe problems 
for expert medical and psychological treatment. School counsellors should have clear roles 
and responsibilities and be empowered to facilitate teacher and parent support for students. 
4. Consider specific needs of ethnic minority students, girls and LGBTQ students in policy 
and programme development. These groups are at higher risk for mental health problems. 
Programmes may tailor outreach, engagement and implementation approaches to students 
of different ethnicities, genders and sexual/gender identities in order to maximize programme 
success with these vulnerable groups. 
5. Build human resources. Human resources for adolescent student mental health are lacking 
in all sectors. MOET can consider human resource needs and develop policies to build capacity 
within the education sector. 
a. Build human resources with specialized student mental health expertise to guide 
programme developments and oversee progress in this area. 
b. Integrate adolescent student mental health and well-being training into the general 
university teacher training curriculum.   
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
78

----- VN022 page 81 -----
B. HEAL TH SECTOR RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Build human resources. The medical system has very few doctors and nurses specialized in 
child and adolescent mental health. 
a. Improve knowledge and skills for all health care workers by including course content related to 
child and adolescent mental health in the general medical school curriculum. 
b. Develop specialized child and adolescent mental health human resources. Significant 
challenges contribute to the lack of psychiatric specialists in Viet Nam. MOH leadership should 
directly addresses these barriers with clear policies and programmes designed to improve 
health sector capacity to care for all people suffering from mental illness, including children 
and adolescents. 
Train school medical staff in basic adolescent mental health. The scope of this training 
will depend on the cross-sector collaborative models developed by the Ministries for addressing 
student mental health needs. However, at a minimum it is recommended that school medical staff 
have basic mental health knowledge, screening capacity for common mental health problems, and 
the ability to coordinate with school counsellors support students and to access local psychiatric 
and other mental health care and treatment. 
Build DOH-DOET collaboration. Formal collaboration between DOH and DOET is necessary 
to address adolescent student mental health. Leadership from both ministries must prioritize this 
effort and establish policies to guide collaboration. Potential models for collaboration include:
Establish formal partnerships between DOET and DOH including structures for regular sharing 
of data and experiences to support ongoing programme and service development.
Develop systems for referral of students to psychiatric hospitals or medical centres when in 
need of higher-level care for severe mental health problems. 
Have local medical specialists participate in mental health literacy programmes for teachers, 
students and parents and support building teacher capacity to recognize signs and symptoms of 
emerging mental health problems. 
C. SOCIAL SECTOR RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Build human resources. MOLISA has made significant progress in developing social work 
capacity for community-based mental health care. However, human resources remain the biggest 
barrier to expanding social work capacity in the area of adolescent student mental health.
a. Improve knowledge and skills for all social workers by including course content related to child 
and adolescent mental health in the general social work curriculum. 
b. Develop specialized adolescent and family mental health human resources. Significant 
challenges contribute to the lack of clinical social workers specialized in child and adolescent 
mental health. MOLISA leadership should develop clear policies and programmes designed to 
improve social sector capacity to support children, families and schools in the area of student 
mental health and well-being. 
2. Build DOLISA-DOET collaboration. Formal collaboration between DOLISA and DOET is 
necessary to address adolescent student mental health. Leadership from both ministries must 
prioritize this effort and establish policies to guide collaboration. Potential models for collaboration 
include:
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
79
----- VN022 page 82 -----
a. Establish formal partnerships between DOLISA and DOET for regular communication 
and sharing of data regarding adolescent mental health problem prevalence and potential 
interventions. This communication and data sharing should inform cross-sector programmes.
b. Integrate adolescent mental health training content into existing MOLISA/DOLISA 
parent training and support programmes. 
c. DOLISA collaboration with DOET to provide school-based life-skills courses for students.
d. Co-develop pathways of care for students with mental health problems referral to 
Social Work Centres for child and family counselling. 
D. UNICEF RECOMMENDATIONS
UNICEF has supported research and development regarding children’s mental health in Viet Nam 
for many years and is in an excellent position to support policy and programmatic developments 
related to this research moving forward. Specific recommendations for UNICEF include: 
1. Public advocacy and awareness raising. UNICEF is in a key position to utilize study findings 
to raise awareness of the importance of adolescent mental health in Viet Nam. There is a serious 
need for public advocacy at the community level and across education, social and health sectors. 
Raising awareness of the serious impact of mental health problems on adolescent health, learning, 
functioning and well-being is a fundamental step towards developing essential systems of support 
for students.   
a. Specifically, UNCIEF may support dissemination of study findings and recommendations to 
leaders in education, health and social sectors and all stakeholders. A dissemination workshop 
with all key stakeholders is recommended. Additional dissemination sessions with specific 
sectors or stakeholders may be a useful way to share study findings and raise awareness. 
2. Facilitate cross-sector collaboration regarding adolescent student policy and 
programme development. As noted at the beginning of the Recommendations, participant 
administrators and ministry experts from all three sectors identified the lack of cross-sector 
coordination as a significant barrier to progress, and identified a specific need for a cross-sector 
conference or meeting on this subject. UNICEF may be in a key position to facilitate a high-level 
learning and planning conference, bringing cross-sector leaders and stakeholders together to share 
knowledge related to adolescent student mental health, consider sector roles and challenges, and 
develop action plans for policy and programme development. Conference objectives may include 
sector sharing of relevant data and experiences, establishment of goals for adolescent student 
mental health, documentation of models of cross-sector coordination, and consideration of policy 
implications, pilot programmes, and associated research needs. 
3. Advocate for and support further research. Specific areas identified include risk factors for 
vulnerable groups of adolescent students, including girls, ethnic minority, and LGBTQ students. 
While some data exists regarding effective prevention, screening, and support programmes in Viet 
Nam, much remains to be studied. Pilot programmes should be developed with robust monitoring 
and evaluation processes, and results documented and shared with relevant stakeholders. This 
process would be best supported by MOET for the collection and distribution of research as local 
and national programmes are piloted and disseminated. 
4. Support alignment of child protection and adolescent mental health issues. UNICEF has 
great expertise and experience with child protection in Viet Nam. Child protection and adolescent 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
80

----- VN022 page 83 -----
mental health issues share some common risk factors and pathways. It is recommended that 
UNICEF support MOET and MOLISA to consider how to align policies and programmes for 
identification and referral for both child protection and adolescent mental health concerns. This 
will ensure a holistic approach to students’ needs. 
5. Integrate adolescent mental health issues into related UNICEF programmes. For 
example, a participant from MOLISA, Department of Children Affairs, expressed hope that UNICEF 
will continue to work with them on programmes related to child protection, integrating child 
mental health support into these programmes. A specific goal shared was the development of 
toolkits for supporting children with mental health problems.
E. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH
There is sufficient evidence regarding Vietnamese adolescent student mental health needs, 
limitations of the current systems of support, and promising programmes for improving students’ 
mental health and well-being. Policy and programmatic planning should move forward. However, 
models of collaboration and programmes should be piloted within schools, districts or providences 
before scaling up to the national level. Research should evaluate these pilot programmes and guide 
subsequent expansion efforts. Research on both the efficacy and effectiveness of models and 
programmes must be included in the process. Studying (a) what programmes have a significant 
impact on student well-being, and (b) what implementation factors are associated with successful 
uptake and implementation will be necessary. 
Research on the specific mental health needs of adolescent students from vulnerable groups is 
lacking. Studies of ethnic minority and LGBTQ students are needed to more clearly understand the 
problems these students experience, the barriers they face, and how schools and communities 
can best support their health and well-being. 
F . PANDEMIC SUPPORT
Students around the world have suffered during the COVID-19 pandemic. School closures and 
social restrictions have deprived students of social relationships essential to healthy development. 
Financial stress on families has impacted students’ mental health. Disengagement and stress have 
led to increased rates of depression and anxiety in young people globally. Viet Nam is no exception 
and all stakeholders express concern regarding the impact of the pandemic on adolescent health 
and development. 
While these recommendations primarily focus on longer-term policy and programmatic 
developments, it is clear that adolescent students require mental health and well-being support 
now. MOET and all stakeholders must consider timely interventions to support students 
impacted by the pandemic. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
81
----- VN022 page 84 -----
Guidelines for Focus Groups with Students
** We really appreciate your participation in this group. Today we just want to have a discussion 
about your life, school and some things that can be stressful for kids. We are talking with kids like 
you from 5 different provinces in VN. In this way we can learn more about the life of adolescents 
like you, and be able to support students better at school. This discussion is being recorded just so 
we don’t miss anything you say. We will keep everything said anonymous – that means that we will 
never use your name or identity when we share things we learn from this discussion. I hope you 
can speak freely about your experiences since then we can truly understand what life is like for you 
and try to improve things that may be difficult. Any questions? 
** Assent form.
1. How do you like school? What do you like and what do you not like?
2. What causes you stress in life? (if not mentioned, ask specifically about academic stress, stress 
about peer relationships, stress about family problems or circumstances, internet/social 
media/cyberbullying) 
3. How does stress affect your life? (Helps you? Causes problems for you? Does it help you with 
your school work or make it hard for you academically?)
4. What do you do after school? What do you do on weekends? (understand if they have any 
time to relax or engage in sports, hobbies or fun activities)
5. What do you do to help yourself when you are stressed?
6. If students are having a hard time emotionally, because of stress or other problems, do your 
teachers or school help in some way?
7. What do you think your school could do to better support students emotionally?
Appendix 1
Focus Group Guidelines 
and Questions
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
82

----- VN022 page 85 -----
Guidelines for Focus Groups with LGBTQ Students
** We really appreciate your participation in this group. Today we just want to have a discussion 
about your life, school and some things that can be stressful for kids. We are talking with kids from 
5 different provinces in VN. In this way we can learn more about the life of adolescents, and be 
able to support students better at school. We know that LGBTQ kids may have specific stressors or 
challenges so it’s really helpful to talk with your group today. We hope that the things we learn from 
this discussion can help Hanoi DOET, and the national MOET, be able to provide more support for 
LGBTQ students so that all students can feel supported and successful at school. This discussion is 
being recorded just so we don’t miss anything you say. We will keep everything said anonymous – 
that means that we will never use your name or identity when we share things we learn from this 
discussion. I hope you can speak freely about your experiences since then we can truly understand 
what life is like for you and try to improve things that may be difficult. Any questions? 
** Assent form.
1. How do you like school? What do you like and what do you not like?
2. How does being LGBTQ affect your life as a teenager? (Positive identity? Fear of stigma or 
discrimination? Worry about family reaction? Experience pressure or negative reactions from 
family?)
3. How does being LGBTQ affect your life as a student? (Worry about peer reaction? Experience 
discrimination and/or bullying from peers? Worry about teacher reaction? Experience 
discrimination from teachers? Academic impact does it make it harder to study or have 
success in school in some way?)
4. How do you feel when you think about the future? (Positive? Worried or pessimistic?)
5. How does stress in your life affect you? (Helps you? Causes problems for you? Trouble sleeping, 
eating, socializing, etc.? Does it help you with your schoolwork or make it hard for you 
academically?)
6. What do you do to help yourself when you are stressed?
7. If you or your friends are having a hard time emotionally, because of stress or other problems, 
do your teachers or your school help in some way?
8. What do you think your school could do to better support you and other LGBTQ students 
emotionally and academically?
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
83
----- VN022 page 86 -----
Guidelines for Focus Groups with Parents
** We really appreciate your participation in this group. Today we just want to have a discussion 
about your children’s life, school and some things that can be stressful for kids. We are talking 
with parents like you from 5 different provinces in VN. In this way we can learn more about the 
life of adolescent students, in order to better support students at school. This discussion is being 
recorded just so we don’t miss anything you say. We will keep everything said anonymous – that 
means that we will never use your name or identity when we share things we learn from this 
discussion. I hope you can speak freely about your experiences since then we can truly understand 
what life is like for your child and try to improve things that may be difficult. Any questions? 
** Consent form.
1. How are your children doing emotionally? How is their well-being?
2. Do your children experience stress? How much stress/how often? 
3. What causes your child stress in life? (if not mentioned, ask specifically about academic stress, 
stress about peer relationships, stress about family problems or circumstances, internet/social 
media/cyberbullying) 
4. How does stress affect your child’s life? (Helps him/her? Causes problems for him/her? Does it 
help you with his/her school work or make it hard for him/her academically?)
5. What does your child do after school? What does she/he do on weekends? (learn if they have 
any time to relax or engage in sports, hobbies or fun activities)
6. Do you think the children spend too much time on school work and studying? 
7. What should the school and society do to reduce student stress and support students better? 
Guidelines for Focus Groups with Teachers
** We really appreciate your participation in this group. Today we just want to have a discussion 
about your students and some things that can be stressful for kids. We are talking with teachers 
like you from 5 different provinces in VN. In this way we can learn more about the life of adolescent 
students, in order to better support you and your students at school. This discussion is being 
recorded just so we don’t miss anything you say. We will keep everything said anonymous – that 
means that we will never use your name or identity when we share things we learn from this 
discussion. I hope you can speak freely about your experiences since then we can truly understand 
what life is like for the students you teach. The results of this project will be shared with help and 
try to improve things that may be difficult. Any questions? 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
84

----- VN022 page 87 -----
** Consent form.
1. How are your students doing emotionally? How is their well-being?
2. Do your students experience stress? How much stress/how often? 
3. What causes your students to have stress in life? (if not mentioned, ask specifically about 
academic stress, stress about peer relationships, stress about family problems or circumstances, 
internet/social media/cyberbullying) 
4. How does stress affect your students in life? (Helps him/her? Causes problems for him/her?)
5. Does stress help students with school work or make it harder for them to succeed academically?
6. How much school work do students usually do outside of school hours?
7. How many of your students take extra classes or have tutors after school or on weekends?
8. What do you think about parents’ expectations of their children’s academic performance?
9. What do you think about students’ expectations of themselves?
10. Do you think the children spend too much time on school work and studying? 
11. Does the school have any programmes or services to support students suffering from stress 
or mental health problems?
12. What else do you think the school and society could do to reduce student stress and support 
students better? 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
85
----- VN022 page 88 -----
Ministry of Health KII Guidelines
Participants: MOH, DOH Key Informants (45-60 minutes each). 
Goals: Explore perceptions of student mental health needs and risk factors, 
understanding of relevant policies, and knowledge and understanding 
of existing MHPSS programmes.
Introduction to the study and this interview
Key Informant Information:
Name:
Date:
Job Title:
Y ears of Experience with Adolescent Education, Health or Social Support:
Semi-Structured Interview Questions:
1. What is your experience with the topic of adolescent student mental health and well-being?
2. How important is the issue of adolescent student mental health and well-being?
3. What are common mental health problems or needs in adolescent students in Viet Nam?
4. What are major factors that put kids at risk for mental health problems? (consider academic 
pressure, study burden, school climate, home situation, substance abuse, poverty, illness, 
systemic issues in education, health, social support)
5. Are there ways that the health sector (MOH, DOH) supports kids’ mental health and well-being? 
a. What MOH/DOH policies exist regarding adolescent mental health and well-being? 
b. What specific services or interventions exist for students’ emotional and mental health? 
c. Are these services / interventions effective?
Appendix 2
Key Informant Interview 
Guidelines and Questions
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
86

----- VN022 page 89 -----
6. Is there any coordination between the health sector and the educational sector? Please 
describe.
7. What types of coordination between the health system and the school system would improve 
support for adolescent mental health? 
MOLISA KII Guidelines
Participants: MOLISA, DOLISA Key Informants (45-60 minutes each). 
Goals: Explore perceptions of student mental health needs and risk factors, 
understanding of relevant policies, and knowledge and understanding 
of existing MHPSS programmes.
Introduction to the study and this interview
Key Informant Information:
Name:
Date:
Job Title:
Y ears of Experience with Adolescent Education, Health or Social Support:
Semi-Structured Interview Questions:
1. What is your experience with the topic of adolescent student mental health and well-being?
2. How important is the issue of adolescent student mental health and well-being?
3. What are common mental health problems or needs in adolescent students in Viet Nam?
4. What are major factors that put kids at risk for mental health problems? (consider academic 
pressure, study burden, school climate, home situation, substance abuse, poverty, systemic 
issues in education, health, social support)
5. Are there ways that the social services sector (MOLISA, DOLISA) supports kids’ mental health 
and well-being? 
a. What MOLISA/DOLISA policies exist regarding adolescent mental health and well-being? 
b. What specific services or interventions exist for students’ emotional and mental health? 
c. Are these services / interventions effective?
6. Is there any coordination with the educational sector? Please describe.
7. What types of coordination with the school system would improve support for adolescent 
mental health? 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
87
----- VN022 page 90 -----
Education Sector KII Guidelines
Participants: Principles, DOET, and MOET Key Informants (45-60 minutes 
each). 
Goals: Explore perceptions of student mental health needs and School-
Related risk factors, understanding of relevant policies, and knowledge 
and understanding of existing MHPSS programmes.
Introduction to the study and this interview
Key Informant Information:
Name:
Date:
Job Title:
Y ears of Experience with Adolescent Education, Health or Social Support:
Semi-Structured Interview Questions:
1. What is your experience with the topic of adolescent student mental health and well-being?
2. How important is the issue of adolescent student mental health and well-being?
3. What are common mental health problems or needs in adolescent students in Viet Nam?
4. Are there ways that schools and/or the educational system put kids at risk for mental health 
problems? What specific aspects of school contribute to students’ social, emotional and 
psychological problems? (consider academic pressure, study burden, school climate, home 
situation, systemic issues in education, health, social support)
5. Are there ways that schools and/or the educational system support kids’ mental health and 
well-being? 
a. What school policies exist regarding student mental health and well-being? 
b. What specific services or interventions do schools have for students’ emotional and mental 
health? 
c. Are these services / interventions effective?
6. What else could schools do to support kids’ mental health and well-being?
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
88

----- VN022 page 91 -----
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
89
----- VN022 page 92 -----
Ethnicity:
Kinh: 307 (45.9%) Jrai: 110 (16.5%) Thái: 98 (14.7%)
Mông: 22 (3.3%) Ba Na: 13 (1.9%) Mường: 5 (.7%)
Khơ Mú: 5 (.7%) Khác: 24 (bao gồm Cống, 
Dao, Ê đê, Hàn Quốc, Lào, 
Nhắng, Nùng, Phù Lá, Sơ rá, 
Tày, và Xơ đăng)
“N/A”: 85 (12.7%)
Province:
DESCRIPTIVE DATA: STUDENT PARTICIPANTS
Age:
Mean 14.23, median = 14, SD = 1.9
Range: 11 years – 18 years Gender:
Male: 228 (34%) 
Female: 439 (66%)
Ha Noi:  
124 (18.6%)
Dien Bien:  
184 (27.5%)
Dong Thap:  
178 (26.6%)
Gia Lai:  
176 (26.3%)
Appendix 3
Quantitative Data Results
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
90

----- VN022 page 93 -----
School Type: 
 # Public: 608  # Semi-public: 60
Quantitative Data Regarding Mental Health, Academic Pressure and Bullying 
Quantitative Data was collected from secondary school and high school students in Ha Noi, 
Dien Bien, Gia Lai and Dong Thap provinces. Students completed questionnaires regarding their 
mental health, school climate (safety, engagement, and school environment), academic pressure, 
and cyberbullying experiences. Participants came from three schools in each province (668 total 
students). Surveys in Dien Bien, Gia Lai, and Dong Thap were administered in April – May 2021. 
Data collection in Ha Noi was delayed in September 2021. 
Mental Health Symptoms (Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire-25).
1. Overall student mental health. Percent of students reporting normal, moderate-risk and 
high-risk levels of symptoms on self-report measure (SDQ-25 Total Problems and Sub-Scales). 
26.1% of adolescent students reported symptoms associated with moderate or high risk for mental 
health problems. The most common types of problems reported were peer problems (32%) and 
emotional problems (30.9%). Hyperactivity symptoms were reported by 14.4% of students and 
conduct problems were found in 11% of students.
School level:
# secondary school: 425 (63.6%)  # high school 242 (36.2%)
Grade level: ranges from 7-12th grades
in 6th in 7th in 8th  in 9th in 10th in 11th
18.6% 25.7% 19.3% 15% 16.5% 10, 4.9%
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
91
----- VN022 page 94 -----
Students Risk Level (N=668)
Normal  
N (%)
Moderate-Risk  
N (%)
High-Risk  
N (%)
Total Mental Health Problems 439 (65.7%) 112 (16.8%) 62 (9.3%)
Conduct Problems 581 (87%) 47 (7%) 27 (4%)
Emotional Problems 446 (66.8%) 104 (15.6%) 102 (15.3%)
Hyperactivity 552 (82.6%) 66 (9.9%) 30 (4.5%)
Peer Problems 436 (65.3%) 167 (25.0%) 47 (7.0%)
2. Student mental health and gender. See similar rates of problems among boys and girls 
except for Emotional Problems (symptoms of depression and anxiety) where we see significantly 
higher rates of emotional problem symptoms in girls compared to boys. 
Gender N Mean
Conduct Problems
male 226 1.85
female 428 1.76
Hyperactivity
male 223 3.88
female 424 3.77
Emotional Problems**
male 224 4.24
female 427 4.92
Peer Problems
male 226 2.91
female 423 2.99
Total Difficulties
male 216 12.88
female 396 13.45
**Highly significant, p<.01. 
*Significant, p<.05.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
92

----- VN022 page 95 -----
3. Student mental health and school level. See significant differences with high school 
students having more conduct problems, hyperactivity, emotional and total problems compared 
to students in secondary schools. 
N Mean
Conduct Problems*
secondary school 414 1.68
high school 240 1.98
Hyperactivity**
secondary school 412 3.63
high school 235 4.12
Emotional Problems**
secondary school 413 4.46
high school 238 5.07
Peer Problems
secondary school 413 2.91
high school 236 3.05
Total Problems**
secondary school 387 12.62
high school 225 14.27
**Highly significant, p<.01. 
*Significant, p<.05.
School Climate (Adapted Maryland Safe and Supportive Schools Climate Survey; MDS3). 56 items 
assess 3 dimensions of school climate, including safety (perceived safety, bullying and aggression, 
general drug use), Engagement  (connection to teachers, student connectedness, academic 
engagement, whole school connectedness, culture of equity, parent engagement), and school 
environment (rules and consequences, physical comfort, support, disorder). All answer choices 
are scored on a 4‐point Likert scale from strongly agree to strongly disagree, whereby higher scores 
represent a more favourable school climate.
School Climate and Student Mental Health. See a weak-to-moderate relationship between 
student reports of school climate factors and student mental health. Student perceptions of 
school safety, student engagement in school and the school environment are all significantly 
correlated with all mental health problems. There is a moderately strong relationship between Total 
Mental Health Difficulties and student perceived school engagement and school environment. 
As correlational analyses cannot prove the direction of the relationship, it may be that (a) school 
climate may influence student mental health, (b) student mental health may influence their 
perceptions of school, (c) they both may influence each other or (d) something else may influence 
both school climate and student mental health.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
93
----- VN022 page 96 -----
Pearson correlation table. Cell N ranges from 570 – 643.
Student Mental Health School Climate
Student Safety Student 
Engagement
School 
Environment
Conduct Problems -.15** -.18** -.19**
Hyperactivity -.12** -.11** -13**
Emotional Problems -.08* -.21** -.18**
Peer Problems -.10** -.11** -.15**
Total Difficulties -.16** -.22** -.22**
**Highly significant, p<.01. 
*Significant, p<.05.
School Climate and Gender. Girls and boys report similar perceptions of school safety and the 
school environment. Boys rate their experiences with school engagement more positively than 
girls. 
Gender N Mean
Safety
male 222 14.36
female 416 14.03
Engagement*
male 218 68.16
female 397 66.24
School Environment
male 220 38.28
female 412 37.29
**Highly significant, p<.01. 
*Significant, p<.05.
School Climate and School Level. See that high schoolers perceive school to be safer, while 
secondary school students report greater school engagement compared to high school students 
(including greater student connectedness, academic engagement and parent engagement). 
Students report higher rates of bullying in secondary school. Students report higher rates of drug 
and alcohol use in high school. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
94

----- VN022 page 97 -----
N Mean
Safety**
secondary school 404 13.56
high school 233 15.14
Engagement**
secondary school 387 67.84
high school 227 65.33
School Environment
secondary school 403 37.80
high school 228 37.32
Perceived Safety*
secondary school 414 6.74
high school 235 6.49
Bullying**
secondary school 418 3.80
high school 239 4.77
Drug Use**
secondary school 419 2.91
high school 240 4.00
Connection to Teachers
secondary school 415 14.80
high school 238 14.49
Student Connectedness**
secondary school 421 11.76
high school 240 10.91
Academic Engagement**
secondary school 421 9.80
high school 241 9.45
Whole School Connectedness
secondary school 422 10.05
high school 240 9.99
Culture of Equity
secondary school 411 9.83
high school 236 9.76
Parent Engagement**
secondary school 417 11.49
high school 236 10.91
Rules and Consequences
secondary school 414 12.44
high school 239 12.25
Physical Comfort*
secondary school 424 9.04
high school 241 8.59
Support
secondary school 421 7.04
high school 236 7.06
Disorder
secondary school 418 9.23
high school 238 9.52
Total School Climate
secondary school 354 120.18
high school 211 117.46
**Highly significant, p<.01. 
*Significant, p<.05.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
95
----- VN022 page 98 -----
School Climate and Province
See differences on perceived safety of students in Ha Noi vs. all other provinces. Students in Ha 
Noi feel significantly safer than students in each other province. Also see students in Gia Lai feel 
significantly less safe than students in each other province. Students in Dien Bien report the least 
school engagement in school while students in Dong Thap are the most engaged.
N Mean
Ha Noi Safety** 124 17.86
Engagement* 124 66.88
Environment 124 38.35
DT Safety 176 15.14
Engagement 169 68.98
Environment 172 37.39
DB Safety 170 13.38
Engagement 162 65.75
Environment 170 37.31
GL Safety 162 11.19
Engagement 154 66.20
Environment 161 37.76
**Highly significant, p<.01. 
*Significant, p<.05.
Academic Pressure (Educational Stress Scale for Adolescents; ESSA) and Gender. The ESSA 
includes 16 items rated by students on a 5-point scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly 
agree) with higher scores indicating greater stress. The scale covers five dimensions of educational 
stress including study pressure (4 items), worry about grades (3 items), despondency (3 items), self-
expectation (3 items), and workload (3 items).
Academic Pressure and Mental Health. Correlational analyses indicate a moderate-to-strong 
relationship between student experiences of academic pressure and student reported mental 
health. Study pressure, worry about grades, despondency related to academics, self-expectations, 
and workload were all significantly related to all mental health problems (excluding workload x 
peer problems). There is a strong relationship between total academic pressure and total mental 
health difficulties. As correlational analyses cannot prove the direction of the relationship, it may 
be that (a) academic pressure may influence student mental health, (b) student mental health may 
influence student experiences of academic pressure, (c) they both may influence each other or (d) 
something else may influence both academic pressure and student mental health.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
96

----- VN022 page 99 -----
Pearson correlation table. Cell N ranges from 571 – 650.
Academic Pressure
Student Mental 
Health
Total 
Academic 
Pressure
Study 
Pressure
Worry 
About 
Grades
Despondency Self-
Expectation
Workload
Conduct Problems .33** .30** .15** .31** .24** .19**
Hyperactivity .36** .34** .14** .36** .26** .22**
Emotional 
Problems
.35** .30** .18** .36** .32** .13**
Peer Problems .14** .13** .10** .10** .13** .05
Total Difficulties .42** .38** .20** .40** .35** .21**
**Highly significant, p<.01. 
*Significant, p<.05.
Academic Pressure and Gender
See the girls experience significantly higher levels of academic pressure including pressure to 
study, worries about grades, self-expectations, and despondency regarding academics. This is in 
spite of similar perceptions of academic workload among boys and girls. 
Gender N Mean
Pressure to study**
male 224 10.17
female 429 11.11
Worry about grades**
male 222 9.51
female 429 10.33
Self-expectation**
male 220 8.60
female 423 9.75
Workload
male 219 7.92
female 435 8.03
Despondency**
male 225 8.13
female 436 8.85
Total Pressure**
male 211 44.27
female 407 48.11
**Highly significant, p<.01. 
*Significant, p<.05.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
97
----- VN022 page 100 -----
Academic Pressure and School Level. See that high school students report significantly more 
academic pressure compared to secondary school students. The academic stress comes from 
pressure to study, self-expectations, workload, and their experience of greater despondency.
N Mean
Pressure to study**
secondary school 414 10.15
high school 239 11.86
Worry about grades
secondary school 412 9.91
high school 239 10.26
Self-expectation**
secondary school 415 8.90
high school 237 10.12
Workload**
secondary school 416 7.75
high school 238 8.40
Despondency**
secondary school 419 8.24
high school 242 9.22
Total Pressure**
secondary school 389 44.93
high school 229 49.82
**Highly significant, p<.01. 
*Significant, p<.05.
Total Academic Pressure and Province. See higher levels of academic pressure in Gia Lai and 
Ha Noi compared to Dong Thap and Dien Bien provinces. 
N Mean
Ha Noi 124 47.61
DT 166 45.40
DB 164 45.73
GL 160 48.71
Total 615 46.76
Time Spent Studying After School. See that over 50% of students are studying more than 2 
hours with 28% reporting more than 3 hours of study each night. 
a. Almost none – 24 (3.6%)
b. less than one hour – 60 (9.0%)
c. 1–2 hours – 225 (33.7%)
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
98

----- VN022 page 101 -----
d. 2–3 hours – 169 (25.3%)
e. more than 3 hours – 188 (28.1%)
Time for Private Tutoring and Extra Classes. See half of students with 2 or fewer hours of extra 
classes or tutoring per week. And see half with more than 3 hours per week, including 15% with 
more than 9 hours a week of extra classes/tutoring. 
a. Almost none – 213 (31.9%)
b. 1–2 hours – 138 (20.7%)
c. 3-5 hours – 130 (19.5%)
d. 6-8 hours – 83 (12.4%)
e. 9-12 hours – 50 (7.5%)
f. more than 12 hours – 51 (7.6%)
g. Academic Performance. 
Student Reported GPA. No significant gender differences were detected. 
Maths N (%) VietnameseN (%) Overall GPAN(%)
Below 5 53 (7.9%) 19 (2.8%) 10 (1.5%)
5-6.9 199 (29.8%) 172 (25.7%) 108 (16.2%)
6-7.9 152 (22.8%) 252 (37.7%) 229 (34.3%)
8-10 261 (39.1%) 223 (33.4%) 315 (47.2%)
Cyberbullying frequency. A total of 668 student responses to the question, “Have you ever been 
cyberbullied?” No significant gender differences or providence differences were detected. 
Have you ever been cyberbullied?”
Never 316 (47.3%)
Rarely 200 (29.9%)
Sometimes 135 (20.2%)
Often 14 (2.1%)
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
99
----- VN022 page 102 -----
Cyberbullying Frequency and Distress. Adapted from the Revised Cyberbullying Inventory. The 
Revised Cyber Bullying Inventory, Viet Nam includes 18 items regarding student experiences on the 
internet during the previous 6 months, including frequency of experiences and distress regarding 
the experiences. Higher scores on the scale reflect greater frequency of cybervictimization and 
greater associated stress. 
Cyberbullying and School Level. High schoolers are significantly more likely to experience 
cyberbullying and report significantly more distress related to cyberbullying compared to students 
in secondary schools.
N Mean
Cyberbullying frequency**
secondary school 395 2.35
high school 237 3.35
Cyberbullying distress**
secondary school 363 14.90
high school 221 19.13
Cyberbullying and Gender. No significant gender differences were detected for student 
reported cyberbullying frequency and distress. 
N Mean
Cyberbullying frequency
male 217 2.68
female 415 2.74
Cyberbullying distress
male 201 14.89
female 383 17.39
Teacher Survey Results
Teacher participants include 66 teachers who completed a survey. 
Descriptive Data
Province:
# Ha Noi = 12 
# Dien Bien 18
# Dong Thap 17
# Gia Lai 18
School level:
# secondary school - 40 (60.6%)
# high school - 24 (36.4%)
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
100

----- VN022 page 103 -----
Grade level teach:
Grade 7 - 23
Grade 8 - 15
Grade 9 - 15
Grade 10 - 16
Grade 11 - 16
Grade 12 - 15
School Type:
# Public: 64 (97%)
# Semi-public: 1 (1.5%)
Age:  Mean=39.61, Median=40, SD=6.23  (ages 55 – 25)
Gender:
Male: 10 (15.2%)
Female: 56 (84.8%)
Ethnicity:
54 (81.8%) Kinh
3 (4.5%) Thái
1 (1.5%) Thổ
Highest educational level achieved:
HS
some college
college – 5 (7.6%)
college - extra training – 48 (72.7%)
Masters – 13 (19.7%)
Y ears teaching experience: Mean=16.86; median=18, SD=6.43 (range 1 -29)
Teaching specialty: # of each
[1] Sciences - 17
[2] Math - 12
[3] Literature-Vietnamese - 10
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
101
----- VN022 page 104 -----
[4] History - 7
[5] Foreign Language - 9
[6] Other social sciences subject - 6
[7] Supplemental subject - 6
Average class size: Most teachers have 30 – 40 students in a class, and 38% have 40 – 50 students 
in a class. 
a. # less than 30 students:  No – 64 (97%); Yes – 2 (3%)
b. # 30-40 students: No 23 (34.8%); Yes – 43 (65.2%)
c. # 40-50 students: No 41 (62.1%); Yes 25 (37.9%)
d. #50-60 students: No 66 (100%)
e. # more than 60 students: No 66 (100%)
1. How concerned are you about your students’ stress and well-being? Almost all teachers 
are concerned about their students’ stress and well-being (91%) with 53% of teachers reporting 
they are “Very concerned.”
N (%)
Not at all concerned  1 (1.5%)
A little concerned  4 (6.1%)
Somewhat concerned  25 (37.9%)
Very concerned  35 (53%)
2. How concerned are you about your students’ mental health? Almost all teachers are 
concerned about their students’ mental health (95%) with 54% of teachers reporting they are 
“Very concerned.”
N (%)
Not at all concerned  0
A little concerned  3 (4.5%)
Somewhat concerned  27 (40.9%)
Very concerned  36 (54.5%)
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
102

----- VN022 page 105 -----
3. Approximately how many of your students suffer from stress problems in the past 
month?  
a. 0-10% - 34
b. 10-20% - 15
c. 20-30% - 3
d. 30-40% - 7
e. 40-50% - 2
f. 50-60% - 2
g. 60-70% - 1
h. 70-80% - 2
i. 80-90%- 0
j. 90-100%- 0
4. Approximately how many of your students suffer from mental health problems in 
the past month? 
a. 0-10%  - 50
b. 10-20%  - 10
c. 20-30% - 3
d. 30-40% -3
e. >40% = 0
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
103
----- VN022 page 106 -----
5. What are mental health problems that you see in your students? 
N (%)
Anxiety 34 (51.5%)
Poor attention 61 (92.4%)
Low-energy/tired 40 (60.6%)
Sad/depressed 10 (15.2%)
Lack of confidence 46 (69.7%)
Angry/aggressive 12 (18.2%)
Disruptive behaviour in classroom 13 (19.7%)
Oppositional or defiant behaviour in the 
classroom 
 7 (10.6%)
Alcohol/substance abuse 3 (4.5%)
Serious peer conflicts 6 (9.1%)
6. Does student stress impact student academic success?
N (%)
Stress improves student academic 
performance
2 (3%)
Stress does not affect academic performance. 3 (4.5%)
Stress negatively affects academic 
performance
61 (92.4%)
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
104

----- VN022 page 107 -----
7. What are the contributing factors to why students may develop a mental health 
problem? 
Not a Factor Minor 
Factor
Moderate 
Factor
Major Factor
Bad behaviour 10 (15.2%) 28 (42.4%) 18 (27.3%) 4 (6.1%)
Genetics 17 (25.8%) 25 (37.9%) 16 (24.2%) 6 (9.1%)
Family problems 4 (6.1%) 6 (9.1%) 25 (37.9%) 28 (42.4%)
Academic pressure 6 (9.1%) 20 (30.3%) 27 (40.9%) 11 (16.7%)
Life stress 4 (6.1%) 9 (13.6%) 36 (54.5%) 15 (22.7%)
Personality 14 (21.2%) 23 (34.8%) 19 (28.8%) 5 (7.6%)
Environments 6 (9.1%) 8 (12.1%) 30 (45.5%) 17 (25.8%)
Trauma 9 (13.6%) 14 (21.2%) 31 (47%) 8 (12.1%)
Parenting 1 (1.5%) 7 (10.6%) 28 (42.4%) 26 (39.4%)
Karma 48 (72.7%) 10 (15.2%) 5 (7.6%) 0 
Spiritual failing 45 (68.2%) 16 (24.2%) 1 (1.5%) 1 (1.5%)
8. About what percentage of children in Viet Nam suffer from a mental health problem? 
See that most teachers underestimate rates of mental health problems in children. 
a. Less than 5% - 13 (19.7%)
b. 5-15% - 29 (43.9%)
c. 15-25% - 17 (25.8%)
d. 25-50% - 4 (6.1%)
e. 50-75% - 1 (1.5%)
f. More than 75% - 0
Perceptions of Teacher and School Roles, Barriers and Needs Regarding Student Mental 
Health
9. Teachers’ perceptions of personal competency and role to support children with 
psychosocial problems. Most teachers feel confident in their basic knowledge about student 
mental health, although a sizeable group (about 36%) do not have enough information about 
mental health. Teachers also largely agree that identifying and supporting students with 
mental health problems is part of their role. 
10. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
105
----- VN022 page 108 -----
Completely 
disagree Disagree Agree Completely 
agree
I have enough information about risk factors 
for student mental health problems. 7 (10.6%) 16 
(24.2%) 39 (59.1%) 4 (6.1%)
I have enough information about the causes 
of mental health problems. 5 (7.6%) 17 
(25.8%) 42 (63.6%) 2 (3.0%)
I have enough information about school 
psychosocial services available to students. 1 (1.5%) 10 
(15.2%) 48 (72.7%) 7 (10.6%)
I have enough information about psychosocial 
services in the community. 4 (6.1%) 20 
(30.3%) 40 (60.6%) 2 (3.0%)
I am confident in my ability to identify students 
with mental health or well-bring problems. 3 (4.5%) 12 
(18.2%) 44 (66.7%) 7 (10.6%)
I am confident in my ability to support 
students with mental health or well-being 
problems. 
1 (1.5%) 17 
(25.8%) 43 (65.2%) 5 (7.6%)
What do you think is your role for supporting 
students with mental health problems?
Completely 
disagree Disagree Agree Completely 
agree
It is not my role to support students with 
mental health problems. 28 (42%) 26 
(39.4%) 10 (15.2%) 2 (3%)
I should help identify students with mental 
health problems. (informally or with screening) 0 0 52 (78.8%) 14 (21.2%)
I should help link students with problems to a 
doctor or services like counselling. 0 4 (6.1%) 50 (75.8%) 12 (18.2%)
I should work with school counsellors or other 
professionals to know how best to support 
students with problems in the classroom.
0 1 (1.5%) 49 (74.2%) 16 (24.2%)
I should teach social skills or life skills as part of 
the curriculum. 0 0 45 (68.2%) 21 (31.8%)
I should provide supportive counselling to my 
students with mental health problems. 0 1 (1.5%) 43 (65.2%) 22 (33.3%)
11. What are barriers to providing more services for children with mental health 
problems at school? Teachers identified several major barriers to providing more services 
for children with mental health problems at school, including lack of human resources (like 
counsellors), lack of interest / concern from parents, lack of training opportunities for school 
staff, and lack of policy to guide services. 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
106

----- VN022 page 109 -----
Not a  
Barrier
Minor 
Barrier
Moderate 
Barrier
Major  
Barrier
Lack of human resources (like 
counsellors)
4 (6.1%) 11 (16.7%) 24 (36.4%) 27 (40.9%)
Lack of funding 11 (16.7%) 17 (25.8%) 23 (34.8%) 14 (21.2%)
Lack of interest/concern from 
leadership
19 (28.8%) 12 (18.2%) 18 (27.3) 17 (25.8)
Lack of interest/concern from 
parents
3 (4.5%) 5 (7.6%) 11 (16.7%) 47 (71.2%)
Lack of interest/concern from 
teachers
9 (13.6%) 18 (27.3%) 15 (22.7%) 24 (36.4%)
Lack of training opportunities 
for school staff
4 (6.1%) 9 (13.6%) 39 (59.1%) 14 (21.2%)
Lack of policy to guide services 4 (6.1%) 8 (12.1%) 37 (56.1%) 16 (24.2%)
12. Does your school have any policies in place for student mental health and well-being? 
1. No.  12 (18.2%)
2. Yes.   53 (80.3%) Most identify the school counselling room and counselling service, and 
note a nurse at school. 
13. Does your school have any resources or programmes in place for supporting student 
mental health and well-being? 
1. No - 12 (18.2%)
2. Yes - 54 (81.8%) Many teachers report private doner scholarships for poor students. Also 
report that NGOs and social enterprises have provided help for students with financial or 
social difficulties, and have supported the school with sexual reproductive health or social 
skills education for students. 
3. If yes, are the resources and programmes adequate for supporting students?
i. No - 38 (57.6%)
ii. Yes - 17 (25.8%)
14. Have you had any training in understanding and supporting student mental health 
and well-being? 
a. No - 57 (86.4%)
b. Yes – 9 (13.6%) These teachers report receiving training from MOET and DOET. One 
reported attending a MOET training on general adolescent health. Another attended a 
MOET training on school counselling including adolescent mental health risk factors and 
some solutions to support students. Another teacher reported attending a DOET training 
on adolescent sexual reproductive health.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
107
----- VN022 page 110 -----
Ahmed, S. M., Mishra, G. D., Moss, K. M., Yang, I. A., Lycett, K., & Knibbs, L. D. (2022). Maternal and 
Childhood Ambient Air Pollution Exposure and Mental Health Symptoms and Psychomotor 
Development in Children: An Australian Population-Based Longitudinal Study. Environment 
International, 158, 107003. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2021.107003
Akmatov, M. K. (2010). Child abuse in 28 developing and transitional countries--results from the 
Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. International Journal of Epidemiology, 40(1), 219–227. https://doi.
org/10.1093/ije/dyq168
Aldridge, J. M., & McChesney, K. (2018). The relationships between school climate and adolescent 
mental health and well-being: A systematic literature review. International Journal of Educational 
Research, 88, 121–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2018.01.012
Assing-Murray, E., & Lebrun-Harris, L. (2020). Associations between parent-reported family economic 
hardship and mental health conditions in U.S. children. Journal of Children and Poverty, 26(2), 191–214. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10796126.2020.1764188
Bains, S., & Gutman, L. M. (2021). Mental Health in Ethnic Minority Populations in the UK: 
Developmental Trajectories from Early Childhood to Mid Adolescence. Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 50(11), 2151–2165. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10964-021-01481-5
Blum, R., Sudhinaraset, M., & Emerson, M. R. (2012). Youth at Risk: Suicidal Thoughts and Attempts in 
Vietnam, China, and Taiwan. Journal of Adolescent Health, 50(3), S37–S44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jadohealth.2011.12.006
Bradshaw, C. P ., Waasdorp, T. E., Debnam, K. J., & Johnson, S. L. (2014). Measuring School Climate in 
High Schools: A Focus on Safety, Engagement, and the Environment. Journal of School Health, 84(9), 
593–604. https://doi.org/10.1111/josh.12186
Bruha, L., Spyridou, V., Forth, G., & Ougrin, D. (2018). Global child and adolescent mental health: 
challenges and advances. London Journal of Primary Care, 10(4), 108–109. https://doi.org/10.1080/1757
1472.2018.1484332
Calear, A. L., & Christensen, H. (2010a). Review of internet‐based prevention and treatment programs 
for anxiety and depression in children and adolescents. Medical Journal of Australia, 192(S11). https://
doi.org/10.5694/j.1326-5377.2010.tb03686.x
Calear, A. L., & Christensen, H. (2010b). Systematic review of school-based prevention and early 
intervention programs for depression. Journal of Adolescence, 33(3), 429–438. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
adolescence.2009.07.004
Calear, A. L., Christensen, H., Mackinnon, A., Griffiths, K. M., & O’Kearney, R. (2009a). The YouthMood 
Project: A cluster randomized controlled trial of an online cognitive behavioral program with 
adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(6), 1021–1032. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0017391
References
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
108

----- VN022 page 111 -----
Calear, A. L., Christensen, H., Mackinnon, A., Griffiths, K. M., & O’Kearney, R. (2009b). The YouthMood 
Project: A cluster randomized controlled trial of an online cognitive behavioral program with 
adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(6), 1021–1032. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0017391
Campbell, O. L. K., Bann, D., & Patalay, P . (2021). The gender gap in adolescent mental health: A cross-
national investigation of 566,829 adolescents across 73 countries. SSM - Population Health, 13, 100742. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssmph.2021.100742
CEICdata.com. (2020, July 10). Vietnam Household Income per Capita. CEICdata. https://www.ceicdata.
com/en/indicator/vietnam/annual-household-income-per-capita#:%7E:text=Vietnam%20Annual%20
Household%20Income%20per,averaged%20value%20of%20732.384%20USD.
Chappel, A. M., Suldo, S. M., & Ogg, J. A. (2012). Associations Between Adolescents’ Family Stressors 
and Life Satisfaction. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 23(1), 76–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10826-
012-9687-9
Chi, X., Liu, X., Huang, Q., Huang, L., Zhang, P ., & Chen, X. (2020). Depressive Symptoms among Junior 
High School Students in Southern China: Prevalence, Changes, and Psychosocial Correlates. Journal of 
Affective Disorders, 274, 1191–1200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2020.05.034
Clayborne, Z. M., Varin, M., & Colman, I. (2019). Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis: Adolescent 
Depression and Long-Term Psychosocial Outcomes. Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 58(1), 72–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2018.07.896
Colman, I., Murray, J., Abbott, R. A., Maughan, B., Kuh, D., Croudace, T. J., & Jones, P . B. (2009). Outcomes 
of conduct problems in adolescence: 40 year follow-up of national cohort. BMJ, 338(jan08 2), a2981. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a2981
Colvin, S., Egan, J. E., & Coulter, R. W. S. (2019). School Climate &amp; Sexual and Gender Minority 
Adolescent Mental Health. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 48(10), 1938–1951. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10964-019-01108-w
Cong, T. V., Ngoc, N. P . H., Weiss, B., Luot, N. V., & Dat, N. B. (2018). Definition and Characteristics of 
“Cyberbullying” among Vietnamese Students. VNU Journal of Science: Education Research, 34(4). https://
doi.org/10.25073/2588-1159/vnuer.4212
COVID-19 Mental Disorders Collaborators (2021). Global prevalence and burden of depressive and 
anxiety disorders in 204 countries and territories in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Lancet, 398 
(10312), 1700-1712.  
Dalton, L., Rapa, E., & Stein, A. (2020). Protecting the psychological health of children through effective 
communication about COVID-19. The Lancet Child &amp; Adolescent Health, 4(5), 346–347. https://doi.
org/10.1016/s2352-4642(20)30097-3
Dang, H. M., Weiss, B., Lam, T., & Ho, H. (2018). Mental health literacy and intervention program 
adaptation in the internationalization of school psychology for Vietnam. Psychology in the Schools, 
55(8), 941–954. https://doi.org/10.1002/pits.22156
Dang, H. M., Weiss, B., Nguyen, C. M., Tran, N., & Pollack, A. (2016). Vietnam as a case example of school-
based mental health services in low and middle income countries: Efficacy and effects of risk status. 
School Psychology International, 38(1), 22–41. https://doi.org/10.1177/0143034316685595
Das, J. K., Salam, R. A., Lassi, Z. S., Khan, M. N., Mahmood, W., Patel, V., & Bhutta, Z. A. (2016). 
Interventions for Adolescent Mental Health: An Overview of Systematic Reviews. Journal of Adolescent 
Health, 59(4), S49–S60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2016.06.020
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
109
----- VN022 page 112 -----
Dunlavy, Andrea & Aquah, E.O. & Wilson, M.L.. (2015). Suicidal ideation among school-attending 
adolescents in dar es salaam, Tanzania. Tanzania Journal of Health Research. 17. 10.4314/thrb.v17i1.5.
Dupéré, V., Leventhal, T., Dion, E., Crosnoe, R., Archambault, I., & Janosz, M. (2015). Stressors and 
Turning Points in High School and Dropout. Review of Educational Research, 85(4), 591–629. https://doi.
org/10.3102/0034654314559845
Erskine, H. E., Blondell, S. J., Enright, M. E., Shadid, J., Wado, Y. D., Wekesah, F. M., Wahdi, A. E., Wilopo, S. 
A., Vu, L. M., Dao, H. T. K., Nguyen, V. D., Emerson, M. R., Fine, S. L., Li, M., Blum, R. W., Whiteford, H. A., & 
Scott, J. G. (2021). Measuring the Prevalence of Mental Disorders in Adolescents in Kenya, Indonesia, 
and Vietnam: Study Protocol for the National Adolescent Mental Health Surveys. Journal of Adolescent 
Health. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.05.012
Fairburn, C. G., & Patel, V. (2018). The Impact of Digital Technology on Psychological Treatments and 
Their Dissemination. FOCUS, 16(4), 449–455. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.focus.16405
Fazel, M., Hoagwood, K., Stephan, S., & Ford, T. (2014). Mental health interventions in schools in high-
income countries. The Lancet Psychiatry, 1(5), 377–387. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2215-0366(14)70312-8
Ghosh, A., Cherian, R. J., Wagle, S., Sharma, P ., Kannan, K. R., Bajpai, A., & Gupta, N. (2021). TreadWill: 
Development and pragmatic randomized controlled trial of an unguided, computerized 
cognitive behavioral therapy intervention in a lower middle-income country. medRxiv. https://doi.
org/10.1101/2021.11.24.21266799
Greenwood, C. R., Kratochwill, T. R., & Clements, M. (Eds.). (2008). Schoolwide prevention models: Lessons 
learned in elementary schools. Guilford Press.
Greenwood, C. R., Kratochwill, T. R., & Clements, M. (Eds.). (2008). Schoolwide prevention models: Lessons 
learned in elementary schools. Guilford Press.
Hinze, L. (2021). Teacher violence has a negative impact on students’ mental health and academic 
performance. D+C Development and Cooperation. Retrieved April 26, 2022, from https://www.
dandc.eu/en/article/teacher-violence-has-negative-impact-students-mental-health-and-academic-
performance
Hirota, T., Guerrero, A. P ., & Skokauskas, N. (2020). Child and adolescent mental health needs, services, 
and gap in East and Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands. Starting At the Beginning, 295–315. https://
doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-819749-3.00012-9
Jayanthi, P ., Thirunavukarasu, M., & Rajkumar, R. (2015). Academic stress and depression among 
adolescents: A cross-sectional study. Indian Pediatrics, 52(3), 217–219. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13312-
015-0609-y
Kaplan, D. S., Liu, R. X., & Kaplan, H. B. (2005). School-Related stress in early adolescence and academic 
performance three years later: the conditional influence of self expectations. Social Psychology of 
Education, 8(1), 3–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11218-004-3129-5
Kapungu, C. & Pertoni, S. (2017). Understanding and Tacking the Gendered Drivers of Poor Adolescent 
Mental Health. Washington, DC: International Center for Research on Women. 
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P ., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime Prevalence 
and Age-of-Onset Distributions of DSM-IV Disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(6), 593. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.593
Kutcher, S., Wei, Y., Gilberds, H., Ubuguyu, O., Njau, T., Brown, A., Sabuni, N., Magimba, A., & Perkins, K. 
(2016). A school mental health literacy curriculum resource training approach: effects on Tanzanian 
teachers’ mental health knowledge, stigma and help-seeking efficacy. International Journal of Mental 
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
110

----- VN022 page 113 -----
Health Systems, 10(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13033-016-0082-6
La, T. T. T., Dinh, H. V. T., Phan, M. H. T., Do, L. H. T., Nguyen, P . H. T., & Nguyen, Q. A. N. (2020). Mental 
health among Vietnamese urban late adolescents: The association of parenting styles. Health 
Psychology Open, 7(2), 205510292094873. https://doi.org/10.1177/2055102920948738
Le, H. T. H., Tran, N., Campbell, M. A., Gatton, M. L., Nguyen, H. T., & Dunne, M. P . (2019). Mental health 
problems both precede and follow bullying among adolescents and the effects differ by gender: 
a cross-lagged panel analysis of school-based longitudinal data in Vietnam. International Journal of 
Mental Health Systems, 13(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13033-019-0291-x
Le, M. T. H., Holton, S., Kirkman, M., & Fisher, J. (2018). “I feel that life is meaningless”: Vietnamese 
adolescents’ experiences of and reflections about interpersonal violence. Global Mental Health, 5. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/gmh.2017.34
Le, M. T. H., Holton, S., Nguyen, H. T., Wolfe, R., & Fisher, J. (2015). Poly-Victimisation among Vietnamese 
High School Students: Prevalence and Demographic Correlates. PLOS ONE, 10(5), e0125189. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0125189
Le, M. T. H., Holton, S., Nguyen, H. T., Wolfe, R., & Fisher, J. (2016a). Poly-victimisation and health 
risk behaviours, symptoms of mental health problems and suicidal thoughts and plans among 
adolescents in Vietnam. International Journal of Mental Health Systems, 10(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13033-016-0099-x
Le, M. T. H., Holton, S., Nguyen, H. T., Wolfe, R., & Fisher, J. (2016b). Victimisation, poly-victimisation and 
health-related quality of life among high school students in Vietnam: a cross-sectional survey. Health 
and Quality of Life Outcomes, 14(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12955-016-0558-8
Le, M. T. H., Nguyen, H. T., Tran, T. D., & Fisher, J. R. (2012). Experience of Low Mood and Suicidal 
Behaviors Among Adolescents in Vietnam: Findings from Two National Population-Based Surveys. 
Journal of Adolescent Health, 51(4), 339–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2011.12.027
Lippard, E. T., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2020). The Devastating Clinical Consequences of Child Abuse and 
Neglect: Increased Disease Vulnerability and Poor Treatment Response in Mood Disorders. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 177(1), 20–36. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2019.19010020
Liu, Y. (2015). The longitudinal relationship between Chinese high school students’ academic stress 
and academic motivation. Learning and Individual Differences, 38, 123–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
lindif.2015.02.002
Liu, Y., & Lu, Z. (2011). Longitudinal analysis of Chinese high school student’s stress in school and 
academic achievement. Educational Psychology, 31(6), 723–729. https://doi.org/10.1080/01443410.20
11.600245
López-López, J. A., Kwong, A. S., Washbrook, L., Tilling, K., Fazel, M. S., & Pearson, R. M. (2021). Depressive 
symptoms and academic achievement in UK adolescents: a cross-lagged analysis with genetic 
covariates. Journal of Affective Disorders, 284, 104–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2021.01.091
Lu, C., Li, Z., & Patel, V. (2018). Global child and adolescent mental health: The orphan of development 
assistance for health. PLOS Medicine, 15(3), e1002524. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002524
Luk, J. W., Goldstein, R. B., Yu, J., Haynie, D. L., & Gilman, S. E. (2021). Sexual Minority Status and Age 
of Onset of Adolescent Suicide Ideation and Behavior. Pediatrics, 148(4). https://doi.org/10.1542/
peds.2020-034900
Mah, K. (2018, October 18). The Mental Healthcare Industry in Viet Nam. Viet Nam Briefing.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
111
----- VN022 page 114 -----
Mahfoud, Z. R., Afifi, R. A., Haddad, P . H., & DeJong, J. (2011). Prevalence and determinants of suicide 
ideation among Lebanese adolescents: Results of the GSHS Lebanon 2005. Journal of Adolescence, 
34(2), 379–384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adolescence.2010.03.009
Målqvist, M., Thi Phuong Hoa, D., Thanh Liem, N., Thorson, A., & Thomsen, S. (2013). Ethnic minority 
health in Vietnam: a review exposing horizontal inequity. Global Health Action, 6(1), 19803. https://doi.
org/10.3402/gha.v6i0.19803
Marshal, M. P ., Dietz, L. J., Friedman, M. S., Stall, R., Smith, H. A., McGinley, J., Thoma, B. C., Murray, P . J., 
D’Augelli, A. R., & Brent, D. A. (2011). Suicidality and Depression Disparities Between Sexual Minority 
and Heterosexual Youth: A Meta-Analytic Review. Journal of Adolescent Health, 49(2), 115–123. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2011.02.005
Michelson, D., Malik, K., Krishna, M., Sharma, R., Mathur, S., Bhat, B., Parikh, R., Roy, K., Joshi, A., Sahu, R., 
Chilhate, B., Boustani, M., Cuijpers, P ., Chorpita, B., Fairburn, C. G., & Patel, V. (2020). Development of 
a transdiagnostic, low-intensity, psychological intervention for common adolescent mental health 
problems in Indian secondary schools. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 130, 103439. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.brat.2019.103439
Michelson, D., Malik, K., Parikh, R., Weiss, H. A., Doyle, A. M., Bhat, B., Sahu, R., Chilhate, B., Mathur, S., 
Krishna, M., Sharma, R., Sudhir, P ., King, M., Cuijpers, P ., Chorpita, B., Fairburn, C. G., & Patel, V. (2020a). 
Effectiveness of a brief lay counsellor-delivered, problem-solving intervention for adolescent mental 
health problems in urban, low-income schools in India: a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet Child 
&amp; Adolescent Health, 4(8), 571–582. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2352-4642(20)30173-5
Michelson, D., Malik, K., Parikh, R., Weiss, H. A., Doyle, A. M., Bhat, B., Sahu, R., Chilhate, B., Mathur, S., 
Krishna, M., Sharma, R., Sudhir, P ., King, M., Cuijpers, P ., Chorpita, B., Fairburn, C. G., & Patel, V. (2020b). 
Effectiveness of a brief lay counsellor-delivered, problem-solving intervention for adolescent mental 
health problems in urban, low-income schools in India: a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet Child 
&amp; Adolescent Health, 4(8), 571–582. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2352-4642(20)30173-5
Morris, J., Belfer, M., Daniels, A., Flisher, A., Villé, L., Lora, A., & Saxena, S. (2011). Treated prevalence of 
and mental health services received by children and adolescents in 42 low-and-middle-income 
countries. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 52(12), 1239–1246. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-
7610.2011.02409.x
Ng, C. H., Than, P . T., La, C. D., van Than, Q., & van Dieu, C. (2011). The National Community Mental 
Health Care Project in Vietnam: a Review for Future Guidance. Australasian Psychiatry, 19(2), 143–150. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/10398562.2011.563308
Nguyen, D. T., Dedding, C., Pham, T. T., & Bunders, J. (2013). Perspectives of pupils, parents, and teachers 
on mental health problems among Vietnamese secondary school pupils. BMC Public Health, 13(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-1046
Nguyen, D. T., Dedding, C., Pham, T. T., Wright, P ., & Bunders, J. (2013). Depression, anxiety, and suicidal 
ideation among Vietnamese secondary school students and proposed solutions: a cross-sectional 
study. BMC Public Health, 13(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-1195
Nguyen, H. T., Dunne, M. P ., & Le, A. V. (2010). Multiple types of child maltreatment and adolescent 
mental health in Viet Nam. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 88(1), 22–30. https://doi.
org/10.2471/blt.08-060061
Nguyen, H. T. L., Nakamura, K., Seino, K., & Al-Sobaihi, S. (2019). Impact of parent–adolescent bonding 
on school bullying and mental health in Vietnamese cultural setting: evidence from the global school-
based health survey. BMC Psychology, 7(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40359-019-0294-z
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
112

----- VN022 page 115 -----
OECD & PISA. (2016). Excellence and Equity in Education. PISA 2015 Results, I. https://doi.
org/10.1787/9789264266490-en
Page, R. (2011). Suicide Ideation and Psychosocial Distress in Sub-Saharan African Youth. American 
Journal of Health Behavior, 35(2). https://doi.org/10.5993/ajhb.35.2.1
Pandey, A. R., Bista, B., Dhungana, R. R., Aryal, K. K., Chalise, B., & Dhimal, M. (2019). Factors associated 
with suicidal ideation and suicidal attempts among adolescent students in Nepal: Findings from 
Global School-based Students Health Survey. PLOS ONE, 14(4), e0210383. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0210383
Parikh, R., Michelson, D., Sapru, M., Sahu, R., Singh, A., Cuijpers, P ., & Patel, V. (2019). Priorities and 
preferences for school-based mental health services in India: a multi-stakeholder study with 
adolescents, parents, school staff, and mental health providers. Global Mental Health, 6. https://doi.
org/10.1017/gmh.2019.16
Pascoe, M. C., Hetrick, S. E., & Parker, A. G. (2019). The impact of stress on students in secondary school 
and higher education. International Journal of Adolescence and Youth, 25(1), 104–112. https://doi.org/1
0.1080/02673843.2019.1596823
Peltzer, K., Yi, S., & Pengpid, S. (2017). Suicidal behaviors and associated factors among university 
students in six countries in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Asian Journal of 
Psychiatry, 26, 32–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajp.2017.01.019
Phuong, T. B., Huong, N. T., Tien, T. Q., Chi, H. K., & Dunne, M. P . (2013). Factors associated with health 
risk behavior among school children in urban Vietnam. Global Health Action, 6(1), 18876. https://doi.
org/10.3402/gha.v6i0.18876
Polanczyk, G. V., Salum, G. A., Sugaya, L. S., Caye, A., & Rohde, L. A. (2015). Annual Research Review: A 
meta-analysis of the worldwide prevalence of mental disorders in children and adolescents. Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 56(3), 345–365. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12381
Reiss, F., Meyrose, A. K., Otto, C., Lampert, T., Klasen, F., & Ravens-Sieberer, U. (2019). Socioeconomic 
status, stressful life situations and mental health problems in children and adolescents: Results 
of the German BELLA cohort-study. PLOS ONE, 14(3), e0213700. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0213700
Riekie, H., Aldridge, J. M., & Afari, E. (2016a). The role of the school climate in high school students’ 
mental health and identity formation: A South Australian study. British Educational Research Journal, 
43(1), 95–123. https://doi.org/10.1002/berj.3254
Riekie, H., Aldridge, J. M., & Afari, E. (2016b). The role of the school climate in high school students’ 
mental health and identity formation: A South Australian study. British Educational Research Journal, 
43(1), 95–123. https://doi.org/10.1002/berj.3254
Rones, M. (2000). School-based mental health services: a research review. Clinical Child and Family 
Psychology Review, 3(4), 223–241. https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1026425104386
Rudatsikira, E., Muula, A. S., Siziya, S., & Twa-Twa, J. (2007). Suicidal ideation and associated factors 
among school-going adolescents in rural Uganda. BMC Psychiatry, 7(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
244x-7-67
Samuels, F., Ho, H., Nguyen, P . et al. (2021) ‘We feel sad and bored’: Covid-19 impacts on mental health 
of adolescents in Viet Nam, ODI Country study, London: ODI (www.odi.org/en/publications/covid-19-
impacts-on-mental-health-of-adolescents-in-viet-nam).
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
113
----- VN022 page 116 -----
Sancassiani, F., Pintus, E., Holte, A., Paulus, P ., Moro, M. F., Cossu, G., Angermeyer, M. C., Carta, M. G., 
& Lindert, J. (2015). Enhancing the Emotional and Social Skills of the Youth to Promote their Well-
being and Positive Development: A Systematic Review of Universal School-based Randomized 
Controlled Trials. Clinical Practice &amp; Epidemiology in Mental Health, 11(1), 21–40. https://doi.
org/10.2174/1745017901511010021
Saunders, B. E., & Adams, Z. W. (2014). Epidemiology of Traumatic Experiences in Childhood. Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 23(2), 167–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2013.12.003
Sherr, L., Cluver, L., Desmond, C., Toska, E., Aber, L., Dhaliwal, M., Webb, D., & Dugbazah, J. (2020). A new 
vehicle to accelerate the UN Sustainable Development Goals. The Lancet Global Health, 8(5), e637–
e638. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2214-109x(20)30103-0
Shinde, S., Weiss, H. A., Khandeparkar, P ., Pereira, B., Sharma, A., Gupta, R., Ross, D. A., Patton, G., & Patel, 
V. (2020). A multicomponent secondary school health promotion intervention and adolescent health: 
An extension of the SEHER cluster randomised controlled trial in Bihar, India. PLOS Medicine, 17(2), 
e1003021. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1003021
Silver, L. (Feb, 2019). Smartphone Ownership Is Growing Rapidly Around the World, but Not Always Equally. 
Pew Research Center. 
Singla, D. R., Shinde, S., Patton, G., & Patel, V. (2021). The Mediating Effect of School Climate 
on Adolescent Mental Health: Findings From a Randomized Controlled Trial of a School-
Wide Intervention. Journal of Adolescent Health, 69(1), 90–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jadohealth.2020.09.030
Snyder, H. R., Young, J. F., & Hankin, B. L. (2017). Chronic Stress Exposure and Generation Are Related 
to the P-Factor and Externalizing Specific Psychopathology in Youth. Journal of Clinical Child &amp; 
Adolescent Psychology, 48(2), 306–315. https://doi.org/10.1080/15374416.2017.1321002
Stallard, P ., Simpson, N., Anderson, S., & Goddard, M. (2007). The FRIENDS emotional health prevention 
programme. European Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 17(5), 283–289. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00787-007-0665-5
Stratton, K. J., Edwards, A. C., Overstreet, C., Richardson, L., Tran, T. L., Trung, L. T., Tam, N. T., Tuan, T., Buoi, 
L. T., Ha, T. T., Thach, T. D., & Amstadter, A. B. (2014). Caretaker mental health and family environment 
factors are associated with adolescent psychiatric problems in a Vietnamese sample. Psychiatry 
Research, 220(1–2), 453–460. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2014.08.033
Sun, J., Dunne, M. P ., Hou, X. Y., & Xu, A. Q. (2011). Educational Stress Scale for Adolescents. Journal of 
Psychoeducational Assessment, 29(6), 534–546. https://doi.org/10.1177/0734282910394976
Thang, N., Hang, N.T.T. (2018) Leaving no one behind in a growing Viet Nam: The story from Young Lives, 
Country Report. Oxford: Young Lives. 
Tran, V. C. (2017). Mental Health Care in Vietnam. Taiwanese Journal of Psychiatry, 31(4), 287–299. http://
www.sop.org.tw/sop_journal/Upload_files/31_4/01.pdf
Trent, M., Dooley, D. G., Dougé, J., Cavanaugh, R. M., Lacroix, A. E., Fanburg, J., Rahmandar, M. H., 
Hornberger, L. L., Schneider, M. B., Yen, S., Chilton, L. A., Green, A. E., Dilley, K. J., Gutierrez, J. R., Duffee, 
J. H., Keane, V. A., Krugman, S. D., McKelvey, C. D., Linton, J. M., . . . Wallace, S. B. (2019). The Impact of 
Racism on Child and Adolescent Health. Pediatrics, 144(2). https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019-1765
Truc, T. T., Loan, K. X., Nguyen, N. D., Dixon, J., Sun, J., & Dunne, M. P . (2012). Validation of the Educational 
Stress Scale for Adolescents (ESSA) in Vietnam. Asia Pacific Journal of Public Health, 27(2), NP2112–
NP2121. https://doi.org/10.1177/1010539512440818
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
114

----- VN022 page 117 -----
UNESCO. (2020, February). UNESCO Institute for Statistics. UNESCO Institute for Statistics. https://uis.
unesco.org
UNICEF. (2018, February 6). Mental health and psychosocial well-being among children and young people 
in Viet Nam. UNICEF Viet Nam. Retrieved October 10, 2020, from https://www.unicef.org/vietnam/
reports/mental-health-and-psychosocial-well-being-among-children-and-young-people-viet-nam
UNICEF. (2019). Adolescent health dashboards country profiles. https://data.unicef.org/resources/
adolescent-health-dashboards-country-profiles/
UNICEF. (2020–2021). Viet Nam SDGCW Survey of Child Discipline (2020 – 2021). Retrieved April 26, 2022, 
from https://www.unicef.org/vietnam/media/8656/file/Child%20discipline.pdf
van Loon, A. W. G., Creemers, H. E., Beumer, W. Y., Okorn, A., Vogelaar, S., Saab, N., Miers, A. C., 
Westenberg, P . M., & Asscher, J. J. (2020). Can Schools Reduce Adolescent Psychological Stress? A 
Multilevel Meta-Analysis of the Effectiveness of School-Based Intervention Programs. Journal of Youth 
and Adolescence, 49(6), 1127–1145. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10964-020-01201-5
Varela, J. J., Savahl, S., Adams, S., & Reyes, F. (2019). Examining the Relationship Among Bullying, School 
Climate and Adolescent Well-Being in Chile and South Africa: a Cross Cultural Comparison. Child 
Indicators Research, 13(3), 819–838. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12187-019-09648-0
Wagner, S., Müller, C., Helmreich, I., Huss, M., & Tadić, A. (2014). A meta-analysis of cognitive functions in 
children and adolescents with major depressive disorder. European Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 
24(1), 5–19. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-014-0559-2
Wang, M. T., L. Degol, J., Amemiya, J., Parr, A., & Guo, J. (2020). Classroom climate and children’s 
academic and psychological well-being: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Developmental 
Review, 57, 100912. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2020.100912
Weiss, B., Dang, M., Trung, L., Nguyen, M. C., Thuy, N. T. H., & Pollack, A. (2014). A Nationally 
Representative Epidemiological and Risk Factor Assessment of Child Mental Health in Vietnam. 
International Perspectives in Psychology, 3(3), 139–153. https://doi.org/10.1037/ipp0000016
Wells, J., Barlow, J., & Stewart‐Brown, S. (2003). A systematic review of universal approaches 
to mental health promotion in schools. Health Education, 103(4), 197–220. https://doi.
org/10.1108/09654280310485546
WOODWARD, L. J., & FERGUSSON, D. M. (2001). Life Course Outcomes of Young People With Anxiety 
Disorders in Adolescence. Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 40(9), 
1086–1093. https://doi.org/10.1097/00004583-200109000-00018
World Bank. (2017). School enrollment, primary (% net) - Vietnam | Data. WorldBank. https://data.
worldbank.org/indicator/SE.PRM.NENR?locations=VN
World Bank Publications. (2020). Global Economic Prospects, June 2020. The World Bank.
“World Bank. 2012. Well Begun, Not Yet Done : Vietnam’s Remarkable Progress on Poverty Reduction and 
the Emerging Challenges. World Bank, Hanoi. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/12326 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO. ”. 
World Health Organization Department of Mental Health and Substance Dependence. Gender 
Disparities in Mental Health (World Health Organization, 2014). 
Xu, F., Cui, W., Xing, T., & Parkinson, M. (2019). Family Socioeconomic Status and Adolescent Depressive 
Symptoms in a Chinese Low– and Middle– Income Sample: The Indirect Effects of Maternal Care and 
Adolescent Sense of Coherence. Frontiers in Psychology, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00819
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY ON SCHOOL-RELATED FACTORS IMPACTING MENTAL HEAL TH  
AND WELL-BEING OF ADOLESCENT BOYS AND GIRLS IN VIET NAM 
115
----- VN022 page 118 -----
HCMC Office: Add: Unit 507, Sun Wah Tower, 115 Nguyen Hue Boulevard, District 1, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam   
Tel: +84 (028)  3.821.9413 | Fax: +84 (028) 3.821.9415
Ha Noi Office: Add: 304 Kim Ma, Ba Dinh, Ha Noi, Viet Nam 
Tel: +84 (0) 24 3.850.0100 | Fax: +84 (0) 24 3.726.5520
Follow us
unicef.org/vi/vietnam /unicefvietnam
/unicefvietnam /@unicefvietnam
/company/unicefvietnam
/UNICEF_vietnam/unicef_vietnam
